








Volunteer | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 















Joining the IEP Staff
Everyone working at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy is a volunteer. We are looking for an additional recruiting editor who will actively recruit authors of articles in various areas of philosophy, those that you know most about. Optionally, this position can be filled for a short time period, such as several months, rather than being a permanent position. A recruiting editor needs a Ph.D. in philosophy. Also, we are seeking area editors for unfilled areas of philosophy. Look for the phrase “open position” in the list of area editors. An area editor must have a Ph.D. in philosophy. In order to volunteer, send an email to the general editor Brad Dowden at dowden@csus.edu.
Area Editors
Philosophy professors are encouraged to e-mail the editor with requests to be an area editor for the IEP. Please check our list of area editors for open positions. The primary responsibilities of area editors include:

maintaining a list of most needed articles in the area,
recruiting authors for articles,
coordinating peer evaluation of articles submitted, and
making a decision about whether to publish submitted articles.

Volunteers
We are seeking volunteers for a variety of tasks at different skill levels:

Projects Manager: Contact  delinquent authors who have promised articles and negotiate a new completion date. Ideally, this person should have a philosophy Ph.D. and a university affiliation.
Copy editors: Copy editors read through newly accepted articles and make the appropriate changes. Ideally, volunteers for this task should have a B.A. degree in some humanities discipline, such as philosophy, English, or history, and have basic copyediting skills. (At the moment we have more copy editors than we need.)
Recruiters: To help expand the number of articles and the breadth of coverage of important areas of philosophy, we seek recruiters who will seek out potential authors and request submissions. Candidate must have a Ph. D. in philosophy.
Graphic Designer: Every few months the IEP receives an article whose line drawings need revising or whose photo needs some minor alteration. [At the moment we do not need a graphics designer.]
Graphic Permissions Consultant: A person who is knowledgeable about obtaining the proper permissions for posting picture and graphics in the IEP.
Computer consultants: The IEP is in regular need of special help with computer-related issues, such as ensuring that the articles written in LaTeX display properly in our WordPress program.

Active Volunteers

Current: Nathan Allen, Elisa Bezençon, Heidi Bowles, Kal Curran, S. D. Hodell, Tyler Loveless, Scott Meltzer, Meah Mostafizur Rahman, Greg Stokley, Mark Weinfurter.
Former Volunteers…

Technical Help

Technical Editors and Consultants: Aman Ali, Manuel Lechthaler, Norm Lee, Joshua Dowden (San Francisco Web Designer), and Bryan Foltz.
Legal Consultant: Brian Butler
The IEP is run on WordPress, an open-source publishing platform. Josh May customized the design based on a default theme, with programming done by Alex Bundy.
The IEP is housed on the University of Tennessee at Martin’s main web server, which is maintained by the University’s Computer Center.
The former IEP graphics and layout program were designed by Marilynn Lawrence; the former indexing program was written by Chris Caldwell.







An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







