








Philosophy of Sexuality | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Philosophy of Sexuality
Among the many topics explored by the philosophy of sexuality are procreation,  contraception, celibacy, marriage, adultery, casual sex, flirting, prostitution,  homosexuality, masturbation, seduction, rape, sexual harassment, sadomasochism,  pornography, bestiality, and pedophilia. What do all these things have  in common? All are related in various ways to the vast domain of human  sexuality. That is, they are related, on the one hand, to the human desires  and activities that involve the search for and attainment of sexual pleasure  or satisfaction and, on the other hand, to the human desires and activities  that involve the creation of new human beings. For it is a natural feature  of human beings that certain sorts of behaviors and certain bodily organs  are and can be employed either for pleasure or for reproduction, or for  both.
The philosophy of sexuality explores these topics both conceptually  and normatively. Conceptual analysis is carried out in the philosophy of  sexuality in order to clarify the fundamental notions of sexual desire  and sexual activity. Conceptual analysis is also carried out in attempting  to arrive at satisfactory definitions of adultery, prostitution, rape,  pornography, and so forth. Conceptual analysis (for example: what are the  distinctive features of a desire that make it sexual desire instead of  something else? In what ways does seduction differ from nonviolent rape?)  is often difficult and seemingly picky, but proves rewarding in unanticipated  and surprising ways.
Normative philosophy of sexuality inquires about the value of sexual  activity and sexual pleasure and of the various forms they take. Thus the  philosophy of sexuality is concerned with the perennial questions of sexual  morality and constitutes a large branch of applied    ethics. Normative philosophy of sexuality investigates what contribution  is made to the good or virtuous life by sexuality, and tries to determine  what moral obligations we have to refrain from performing certain sexual  acts and what moral permissions we have to engage in others.
Some philosophers of sexuality carry out conceptual analysis and the  study of sexual ethics separately. They believe that it is one thing to  define a sexual phenomenon (such as rape or adultery) and quite another thing  to evaluate it. Other philosophers of sexuality believe that a robust  distinction between defining a sexual phenomenon and arriving at moral  evaluations of it cannot be made, that analyses of sexual concepts and  moral evaluations of sexual acts influence each other. Whether there actually  is a tidy distinction between values and morals, on the one hand,  and natural, social, or conceptual facts, on the other hand, is  one of those fascinating, endlessly debated issues in philosophy, and is  not limited to the philosophy of sexuality.
Table of Contents

 Metaphysics of Sexuality
 Metaphysical Sexual Pessimism
 Metaphysical Sexual Optimism
 Moral Evaluations
 Nonmoral Evaluations
 The Dangers of Sex
 Sexual Perversion
 Sexual Perversion and Morality
 Aquinas’s Natural Law
 Nagel’s Secular Philosophy
 Fetishism
 Female Sexuality and Natural Law
 Debates in Sexual Ethics
 Natural Law vs. Liberal Ethics
 Consent Is Not Sufficient
 Consent Is Sufficient
 What Is “Voluntary”?
 Conceptual Analysis
 Sexual Activity vs. “Having Sex”
 Sexual Activity and Sexual Pleasure

 Sexual Activity Without Pleasure 


 References and Further Reading

1. Metaphysics of Sexuality
Our moral evaluations of sexual activity are bound to be affected by    what we view the nature of the sexual impulse, or of sexual desire, to    be in human beings. In this regard there is a deep divide between those    philosophers that we might call the metaphysical sexual optimists and those    we might call the metaphysical sexual pessimists.
The pessimists in the philosophy of sexuality, such as St. Augustine, Immanuel Kant, and, sometimes, Sigmund  Freud, perceive the sexual impulse and acting on it to be something nearly always,  if not necessarily, unbefitting the dignity of the human person; they see  the essence and the results of the drive to be incompatible with more significant  and lofty goals and aspirations of human existence; they fear that the  power and demands of the sexual impulse make it a danger to harmonious  civilized life; and they find in sexuality a severe threat not only to  our proper relations with, and our moral treatment of, other persons, but  also equally a threat to our own humanity.
On the other side of the divide are the metaphysical sexual optimists  (Plato, in some of his works, sometimes Sigmund Freud, Bertrand Russell,  and many contemporary philosophers) who perceive nothing especially obnoxious  in the sexual impulse. They view human sexuality as just another and mostly  innocuous dimension of our existence as embodied or animal-like creatures;  they judge that sexuality, which in some measure has been given to us by  evolution, cannot but be conducive to our well-being without detracting  from our intellectual propensities; and they praise rather than fear the  power of an impulse that can lift us to various high forms of happiness.
The particular sort of metaphysics of sex one believes will influence  one’s subsequent judgments about the value and role of sexuality in the  good or virtuous life and about what sexual activities are morally wrong  and which ones are morally permissible. Let’s explore some of these implications.
 2. Metaphysical Sexual Pessimism
An extended version of metaphysical pessimism might make the following        claims: In virtue of the nature of sexual desire, a person who sexually        desires another person objectifies that other person, both before and during        sexual activity. Sex, says Kant, “makes of the loved person an Object of        appetite. . . . Taken by itself it is a degradation of human nature” (Lectures          on Ethics, p. 163). Certain types of manipulation and deception seem        required prior to engaging in sex with another person, or are so common        as to appear part of the nature of the sexual experience. As Bernard Baumrim        makes the point, “sexual interaction is essentially manipulative—physically,        psychologically, emotionally, and even intellectually” (“Sexual Immorality        Delineated,” p. 300). We go out of our way, for example, to make ourselves        look more attractive and desirable to the other person than we really are,        and we go to great lengths to conceal our defects. And when one person        sexually desires another, the other person’s body, his or her lips, thighs,        toes, and buttocks are desired as the arousing parts they are, distinct        from the person. The other’s genitals, too, are the object of our attention:    “sexuality is not an inclination which one human being has for another        as such, but is an inclination for the sex of another. . . . [O]nly her        sex is the object of his desires” (Kant, Lectures, p. 164).
Further, the sexual act itself is peculiar, with its uncontrollable  arousal, involuntary jerkings, and its yearning to master and consume the  other person’s body. During the act, a person both loses control of himself  and loses regard for the humanity of the other. Our sexuality is a threat  to the other’s personhood; but the one who is in the grip of desire is  also on the verge of losing his or her personhood. The one who desires  depends on the whims of another person to gain satisfaction, and becomes  as a result a jellyfish, susceptible to the demands and manipulations of  the other: “In desire you are compromised in the eyes of the object of  desire, since you have displayed that you have designs which are vulnerable  to his intentions” (Roger Scruton, Sexual Desire, p. 82). A person  who proposes an irresistible sexual offer to another person may be exploiting  someone made weak by sexual desire (see Virginia Held, “Coercion and Coercive  Offers,” p. 58).
Moreover, a person who gives in to another’s sexual desire makes a tool  of himself or herself. “For the natural use that one sex makes of the other’s  sexual organs is enjoyment, for which one gives oneself up to the  other. In this act a human being makes himself into a thing, which conflicts  with the right of humanity in his own person” (Kant, Metaphysics of  Morals, p. 62). Those engaged in sexual activity make themselves willingly  into objects for each other merely for the sake of sexual pleasure. Hence  both persons are reduced to the animal level. “If . . . a man wishes to  satisfy his desire, and a woman hers, they stimulate each other’s desire;  their inclinations meet, but their object is not human nature but sex,  and each of them dishonours the human nature of the other. They make of  humanity an instrument for the satisfaction of their lusts and inclinations,  and dishonour it by placing it on a level with animal nature” (Kant, Lectures,  p. 164).
Finally, due to the insistent nature of the sexual impulse, once things  get going it is often hard to stop them in their tracks, and as a result  we often end up doing things sexually that we had never planned or wanted  to do. Sexual desire is also powerfully inelastic, one of the passions  most likely to challenge reason, compelling us to seek satisfaction even  when doing so involves dark-alley gropings, microbiologically filthy acts,  slinking around the White House, or getting married impetuously.
Given such a pessimistic metaphysics of human sexuality, one might well  conclude that acting on the sexual impulse is always morally wrong. That  might, indeed, be precisely the right conclusion to draw, even if it implies  the end of Homo sapiens. (This doomsday result is also implied by  St. Paul’s praising, in 1 Corinthians 7, sexual celibacy as the  ideal spiritual state.) More frequently, however, the pessimistic metaphysicians  of sexuality conclude that sexual activity is morally permissible only  within marriage (of the lifelong, monogamous, heterosexual sort) and only  for the purpose of procreation. Regarding the bodily activities that both  lead to procreation and produce sexual pleasure, it is their procreative  potential that is singularly significant and bestows value on these activities;  seeking pleasure is an impediment to morally virtuous sexuality, and is  something that should not be undertaken deliberately or for its own sake.  Sexual pleasure at most has instrumental value, in inducing us to engage  in an act that has procreation as its primary purpose. Such views are common  among Christian thinkers, for example, St. Augustine: “A man turns to good  use the evil of concupiscence, and is not overcome by it, when he bridles  and restrains its rage . . . and never relaxes his hold upon it except  when intent on offspring, and then controls and applies it to the carnal  generation of children . . . , not to the subjection of the spirit to the  flesh in a sordid servitude” (On Marriage and Concupiscence, bk.  1, ch. 9).
 3. Metaphysical Sexual Optimism
Metaphysical sexual optimists suppose that sexuality is a bonding mechanism    that naturally and happily joins people together both sexually and nonsexually.    Sexual activity involves pleasing the self and the other at the same time,    and these exchanges of pleasure generate both gratitude and affection,    which in turn are bound to deepen human relationships and make them more    emotionally substantial. Further, and this is the most important point,    sexual pleasure is, for a metaphysical optimist, a valuable thing in its    own right, something to be cherished and promoted because it has intrinsic    and not merely instrumental value. Hence the pursuit of sexual pleasure    does not require much intricate justification; sexual activity surely need    not be confined to marriage or directed at procreation. The good and virtuous    life, while including much else, can also include a wide variety and extent    of sexual relations. (See Russell Vannoy’s spirited defense of the value    of sexual activity for its own sake, in Sex Without Love.)
Irving Singer is a contemporary philosopher of sexuality who expresses  well one form of metaphysical optimism: “For though sexual interest resembles  an appetite in some respects, it differs from hunger or thirst in being  an interpersonal sensitivity, one that enables us to delight in  the mind and character of other persons as well as in their flesh. Though  at times people may be used as sexual objects and cast aside once their  utility has been exhausted, this is no[t] . . . definitive of sexual desire.  . . . By awakening us to the living presence of someone else, sexuality  can enable us to treat this other being as just the person he or she happens  to be. . . . There is nothing in the nature of sexuality as such that necessarily  . . . reduces persons to things. On the contrary, sex may be seen as an  instinctual agency by which persons respond to one another  through their bodies” (The Nature of Love, vol. 2, p. 382. See also Jean  Hampton, “Defining Wrong and Defining Rape”).
Pausanias, in Plato’s Symposium (181a-3, 183e, 184d), asserts that sexuality in itself is neither good  nor bad. He recognizes, as a result, that there can be morally bad and  morally good sexual activity, and proposes a corresponding distinction  between what he calls “vulgar” eros and “heavenly” eros. A person who has  vulgar eros is one who experiences promiscuous sexual desire, has a lust  that can be satisfied by any partner, and selfishly seeks only for himself  or herself the pleasures of sexual activity. By contrast, a person who  has heavenly eros experiences a sexual desire that attaches to a particular  person; he or she is as much interested in the other person’s personality  and well-being as he or she is concerned to have physical contact with  and sexual satisfaction by means of the other person. A similar distinction  between sexuality per se and eros is described by C. S. Lewis in his The  Four Loves (chapter 5), and it is perhaps what Allan Bloom has in mind  when he writes, “Animals have sex and human beings have eros, and no accurate  science [or philosophy] is possible without making this distinction” (Love  and Friendship, p. 19).
The divide between metaphysical optimists and metaphysical pessimists  might, then, be put this way: metaphysical pessimists think that sexuality,  unless it is rigorously constrained by social norms that have become internalized,  will tend to be governed by vulgar eros, while metaphysical optimists think  that sexuality, by itself, does not lead to or become vulgar, that by its  nature it can easily be and often is heavenly. (See the entry,  Philosophy  of Love.)
 4. Moral Evaluations
Of course, we can and often do evaluate sexual activity morally:    we inquire whether a sexual act—either a particular occurrence of a sexual    act (the act we are doing or want to do right now) or a type of sexual    act (say, all instances of homosexual fellatio)—is morally good or morally    bad. More specifically, we evaluate, or judge, sexual acts to be morally    obligatory, morally permissible, morally supererogatory, or morally wrong.    For example: a spouse might have a    moral obligation to engage in    sex with the other spouse; it might be morally permissible for married    couples to employ contraception while engaging in coitus; one person’s    agreeing to have sexual relations with another person when the former has    no sexual desire of his or her own but does want to please the latter might    be an act of supererogation; and rape and incest are commonly thought    to be morally wrong.
Note that if a specific type of sexual act is morally wrong (say, homosexual  fellatio), then every instance of that type of act will be morally wrong.  However, from the fact that the particular sexual act we are now doing  or contemplate doing is morally wrong, it does not follow that any specific  type of act is morally wrong; the sexual act that we are contemplating  might be wrong for lots of different reasons having nothing to do with  the type of sexual act that it is. For example, suppose we are engaging  in heterosexual coitus (or anything else), and that this particular act  is wrong because it is adulterous. The wrongfulness of our sexual activity  does not imply that heterosexual coitus in general (or anything else),  as a type of sexual act, is morally wrong. In some cases, of course, a  particular sexual act will be wrong for several reasons: not only is it  wrong because it is of a specific type (say, it is an instance of homosexual  fellatio), but it is also wrong because at least one of the participants  is married to someone else (it is wrong also because it is adulterous).
5. Nonmoral     Evaluations
We can also evaluate sexual activity (again, either a particular occurrence    of a sexual act or a specific type of sexual activity) nonmorally:    nonmorally “good” sex is sexual activity that provides pleasure to the    participants or is physically or emotionally satisfying, while nonmorally    “bad” sex is unexciting, tedious, boring, unenjoyable, or even unpleasant.    An analogy will clarify the difference between morally evaluating something    as good or bad and nonmorally evaluating it as good or bad. This radio    on my desk is a good radio, in the nonmoral sense, because it does for    me what I expect from a radio: it consistently provides clear tones. If,    instead, the radio hissed and cackled most of the time, it would be a bad    radio, nonmorally-speaking, and it would be senseless for me to blame the    radio for its faults and threaten it with a trip to hell if it did not    improve its behavior. Similarly, sexual activity can be nonmorally good    if it provides for us what we expect sexual activity to provide, which    is usually sexual pleasure, and this fact has no necessary moral implications..
It is not difficult to see that the fact that a sexual activity is perfectly  nonmorally good, by abundantly satisfying both persons, does not mean by  itself that the act is morally good: some adulterous sexual activity might  well be very pleasing to the participants, yet be morally wrong. Further,  the fact that a sexual activity is nonmorally bad, that is, does not produce  pleasure for the persons engaged in it, does not by itself mean that the  act is morally bad. Unpleasant sexual activity might occur between persons  who have little experience engaging in sexual activity (they do not yet  know how to do sexual things, or have not yet learned what their likes  and dislikes are), but their failure to provide pleasure for each other  does not mean by itself that they perform morally wrongful acts.
Thus the moral evaluation of sexual activity is a distinct enterprise  from the nonmoral evaluation of sexual activity, even if there do remain  important connections between them. For example, the fact that a sexual  act provides pleasure to both participants, and is thereby nonmorally good,  might be taken as a strong, but only prima facie good, reason for  thinking that the act is morally good or at least has some degree of moral  value. Indeed, utilitarians such as  Jeremy  Bentham and even  John  Stuart Mill might claim that, in general, the nonmoral goodness  of sexual activity goes a long way toward justifying it. Another example:  if one person never attempts to provide sexual pleasure to his or her partner,  but selfishly insists on experiencing only his or her own pleasure, then  that person’s contribution to their sexual activity is morally suspicious  or objectionable. But that judgment rests not simply on the fact that he  or she did not provide pleasure for the other person, that is, on the fact  that the sexual activity was for the other person nonmorally bad. The moral  judgment rests, more precisely, on his or her motives for not providing  any pleasure, for not making the experience nonmorally good for the other  person.
It is one thing to point out that as evaluative categories, moral goodness/badness  is quite distinct from nonmoral goodness/badness. It is another thing to  wonder, nonetheless, about the emotional or psychological connections between  the moral quality of sexual activity and its nonmoral quality. Perhaps  morally good sexual activity tends also to be the most satisfying sexual  activity, in the nonmoral sense. Whether that is true likely depends on  what we mean by “morally good” sexuality and on certain features of human  moral psychology. What would our lives be like, if there were always a  neat correspondence between the moral quality of a sexual act and its nonmoral  quality? I am not sure what such a human sexual world would be like. But  examples that violate such a neat correspondence are at the present time,  in this world, easy to come by. A sexual act might be both morally and  nonmorally good: consider the exciting and joyful sexual activity of a  newly-married couple. But a sexual act might be morally good and nonmorally  bad: consider the routine sexual acts of this couple after they have been  married for ten years. A sexual act might be morally bad yet nonmorally  good: one spouse in that couple, married for ten years, commits adultery  with another married person and finds their sexual activity to be extraordinarily  satisfying. And, finally, a sexual act might be both morally and nonmorally  bad: the adulterous couple get tired of each other, eventually no longer  experiencing the excitement they once knew. A world in which there was  little or no discrepancy between the moral and the nonmoral quality of  sexual activity might be a better world than ours, or it might be worse.  I would refrain from making such a judgment unless I were pretty sure what  the moral goodness and badness of sexual activity amounted to in the first  place, and until I knew a lot more about human psychology. Sometimes that  a sexual activity is acknowledged to be morally wrong contributes all by  itself to its being nonmorally good.
 6. The Dangers of Sex
Whether a particular sexual act or a specific type of sexual act provides    sexual pleasure is not the only factor in judging its nonmoral quality:    pragmatic and prudential considerations also figure into whether a sexual    act, all things considered, has a preponderance of nonmoral goodness. Many    sexual activities can be physically or psychologically risky, dangerous,    or harmful. Anal coitus, for example, whether carried out by a heterosexual    couple or by two gay males, can damage delicate tissues and is a mechanism    for the potential transmission of various HIV viruses (as is heterosexual    genital intercourse). Thus in evaluating whether a sexual act will be overall    nonmorally good or bad, not only its anticipated pleasure or satisfaction    must be counted, but also all sorts of negative (undesired) side effects:    whether the sexual act is likely to damage the body, as in some sadomasochistic    acts, or transmit any one of a number of venereal diseases, or result in    an unwanted pregnancy, or even whether one might feel regret, anger, or    guilt afterwards as a result of having engaged in a sexual act with this    person, or in this location, or under these conditions, or of a specific    type. Indeed, all these pragmatic and prudential factors also figure into    the moral evaluation of sexual activity: intentionally causing unwanted    pain or discomfort to one’s partner, or not taking adequate precautions    against the possibility of pregnancy, or not informing one’s partner of    a suspected case of genital infection (but see David Mayo’s provocative    dissent, in “An Obligation to Warn of HIV Infection?”), can be morally    wrong. Thus, depending on what particular moral principles about sexuality    one embraces, the various ingredients that constitute the nonmoral quality    of sexual acts can influence one’s moral judgments.
 7. Sexual Perversion
In addition to inquiring about the moral and nonmoral quality of a given    sexual act or a type of sexual activity, we can also ask whether the act    or type is natural or unnatural (that is, perverted). Natural sexual acts,    to provide merely a broad definition, are those acts that either flow naturally    from human sexual nature, or at least do not frustrate or counteract sexual    tendencies that flow naturally from human sexual desire. An account of    what is natural in human sexual desire and activity is part of a philosophical    account of human nature in general, what we might call philosophical anthropology,    which is a rather large undertaking.
Note that evaluating a particular sexual act or a specific type of sexual  activity as being natural or unnatural can very well be distinct from evaluating  the act or type either as being morally good or bad or as being nonmorally  good or bad. Suppose we assume, for the sake of discussion only, that heterosexual  coitus is a natural human sexual activity and that homosexual fellatio  is unnatural, or a sexual perversion. Even so, it would not follow from  these judgments alone that all heterosexual coitus is morally good (some  of it might be adulterous, or rape) or that all homosexual fellatio is  morally wrong (some of it, engaged in by consenting adults in the privacy  of their homes, might be morally permissible). Further, from the fact that  heterosexual coitus is natural, it does not follow that acts of heterosexual  coitus will be nonmorally good, that is, pleasurable; nor does it follow  from the fact that homosexual fellatio is perverted that it does not or  cannot produce sexual pleasure for those people who engage in it. Of course,  both natural and unnatural sexual acts can be medically or psychologically  risky or dangerous. There is no reason to assume that natural sexual acts  are in general more safe than unnatural sexual acts; for example, unprotected  heterosexual intercourse is likely more dangerous, in several ways, than  mutual homosexual masturbation.
Since there are no necessary connections between, on the one hand, evaluating  a particular sexual act or a specific type of sexual activity as being  natural or unnatural and, on the other hand, evaluating its moral and nonmoral  quality, why would we wonder whether a sexual act or a type of sex was  natural or perverted? One reason is simply that understanding what is natural  and unnatural in human sexuality helps complete our picture of human nature  in general, and allows us to understand our species more fully. With such  deliberations, the self-reflection about humanity and the human condition  that is the heart of philosophy becomes more complete. A second reason  is that an account of the difference between the natural and the perverted  in human sexuality might be useful for psychology, especially if we assume  that a desire or tendency to engage in perverted sexual activities is a  sign or symptom of an underlying mental or psychological pathology.
 8. Sexual Perversion and Morality
Finally (a third reason), even though natural sexual activity is not    on that score alone morally good and unnatural sexual activity is not necessarily    morally wrong, it is still possible to argue that whether a particular    sexual act or a specific type of sexuality is natural or unnatural does    influence, to a greater or lesser extent, whether the act is morally good    or morally bad. Just as whether a sexual act is nonmorally good, that is,    produces pleasure for the participants, may be a factor, sometimes an important    one, in our evaluating the act morally, whether a sexual act or type of    sexual expression is natural or unnatural may also play a role, sometimes    a large one, in deciding whether the act is morally good or bad.
A comparison between the sexual philosophy of the medieval Catholic  theologian St. Thomas Aquinas and that of the contemporary secular philosophy Thomas Nagel is in this  regard instructive. Both Aquinas and Nagel can be understood as assuming  that what is unnatural in human sexuality is perverted, and that what is  unnatural or perverted in human sexuality is simply that which does not  conform with or is inconsistent with natural human sexuality. But beyond  these general areas of agreement, there are deep differences between Aquinas  and Nagel.
 9. Aquinas’s Natural Law
Based upon a comparison of the sexuality of humans and the sexuality    of lower animals (mammals, in particular), Aquinas concludes that what    is natural in human sexuality is the impulse to engage in heterosexual    coitus. Heterosexual coitus is the mechanism designed by the Christian    God to insure the preservation of animal species, including humans, and    hence engaging in this activity is the primary natural expression of human    sexual nature. Further, this God designed each of the parts of the human    body to carry out specific functions, and on Aquinas’s view God designed    the male penis to implant sperm into the female’s vagina for the purpose    of effecting procreation. It follows, for Aquinas, that depositing the    sperm elsewhere than inside a human female’s vagina is unnatural: it is    a violation of God’s design, contrary to the nature of things as established    by God. For this reason alone, on Aquinas’s view, such activities are immoral,    a grave offense to the sagacious plan of the Almighty.
Sexual intercourse with lower animals (bestiality), sexual activity  with members of one’s own sex (homosexuality), and masturbation, for Aquinas,  are unnatural sexual acts and are immoral exactly for that reason. If they  are committed intentionally, according to one’s will, they deliberately  disrupt the natural order of the world as created by God and which God  commanded to be respected. (See Summa Theologiae, vol. 43, 2a2ae,  qq. 153-154.) In none of these activities is there any possibility of procreation,  and the sexual and other organs are used, or misused, for purposes other  than that for which they were designed. Although Aquinas does not say so  explicitly, but only hints in this direction, it follows from his philosophy  of sexuality that fellatio, even when engaged in by heterosexuals, is also  perverted and morally wrong. At least in those cases in which orgasm occurs  by means of this act, the sperm is not being placed where it should be  placed and procreation is therefore not possible. If the penis entering  the vagina is the paradigmatic natural act, then any other combination  of anatomical connections will be unnatural and hence immoral; for example,  the penis, mouth, or fingers entering the anus. Note that Aquinas’s criterion  of the natural, that the sexual act must be procreative in form, and hence  must involve a penis inserted into a vagina, makes no mention of human  psychology. Aquinas’s line of thought yields an anatomical criterion of  natural and perverted sex that refers only to bodily organs and what they  might accomplish physiologically and to where they are, or are not, put  in relation to each other.
 10. Nagel’s Secular Philosophy
Thomas Nagel denies Aquinas’s central presupposition, that in order    to discover what is natural in human sexuality we should emphasize what    humans and lower animals have in common. Applying this formula, Aquinas    concluded that the purpose of sexual activity and the sexual organs in    humans was procreation, as it is in the lower animals. Everything else    in Aquinas’s sexual philosophy follows more-or-less logically from this.    Nagel, by contrast, argues that to discover what is distinctive about the    natural human sexuality, and hence derivatively what is unnatural or perverted,    we should focus, instead, on what humans and lower animals do not have in common. We should emphasize the ways in which humans are different    from animals, the ways in which humans and their sexuality are special.    Thus Nagel argues that sexual perversion in humans should be understood    as a psychological phenomenon rather than, as in Aquinas’s treatment, in    anatomical and physiological terms. For it is human psychology that makes    us quite different from other animals, and hence an account of natural    human sexuality must acknowledge the uniqueness of human psychology.
Nagel proposes that sexual interactions in which each person responds  with sexual arousal to noticing the sexual arousal of the other person  exhibit the psychology that is natural to human sexuality. In such an encounter,  each person becomes aware of himself or herself and the other person as  both the subject and the object of their joint sexual experiences. Perverted  sexual encounters or events would be those in which this mutual recognition  of arousal is absent, and in which a person remains fully a subject of  the sexual experience or fully an object. Perversion, then, is a departure  from or a truncation of a psychologically “complete” pattern of arousal  and consciousness. (See Nagel’s “Sexual Perversion,” pp. 15-17.) Nothing  in Nagel’s psychological account of the natural and the perverted refers  to bodily organs or physiological processes. That is, for a sexual encounter  to be natural, it need not be procreative in form, as long as the requisite  psychology of mutual recognition is present. Whether a sexual activity  is natural or perverted does not depend, on Nagel’s view, on what organs  are used or where they are put, but only on the character of the psychology  of the sexual encounter. Thus Nagel disagrees with Aquinas that homosexual  activities, as a specific type of sexual act, are unnatural or perverted,  for homosexual fellatio and anal intercourse may very well be accompanied  by the mutual recognition of and response to the other’s sexual arousal.
 11. Fetishism
It is illuminating to compare what the views of Aquinas and Nagel imply    about fetishism, that is, the usually male practice of masturbating while    fondling women’s shoes or undergarments. Aquinas and Nagel agree that such    activities are unnatural and perverted, but they disagree about the grounds    of that evaluation. For Aquinas, masturbating while fondling shoes or undergarments    is unnatural because the sperm is not deposited where it should be, and    the act thereby has no procreative potential. For Nagel, masturbatory fetishism    is perverted for a quite different reason: in this activity, there is no    possibility of one persons’ noticing and being aroused by the arousal of    another person. The arousal of the fetishist is, from the perspective of    natural human psychology, defective. Note, in this example, one more difference    between Aquinas and Nagel: Aquinas would judge the sexual activity of the    fetishist to be immoral precisely because it is perverted (it violates    a natural pattern established by God), while Nagel would not conclude that    it must be morally wrong—after all, a fetishistic sexual act might be    carried out quite harmlessly—even if it does indicate that something is    suspicious about the fetishist’s psychology. The move historically and    socially away from a Thomistic moralistic account of sexual perversion    toward an amoral psychological account such as Nagel’s is representative    of a more widespread trend: the gradual replacement of moral or religious    judgments, about all sorts of deviant behavior, by medical or psychiatric    judgments and interventions. (See Alan Soble, Sexual Investigations,    chapter 4.)
 12. Female Sexuality and Natural Law
A different kind of disagreement with Aquinas is registered by Christine    Gudorf, a Christian theologian who otherwise has a lot in common with Aquinas.    Gudorf agrees that the study of human anatomy and physiology yields insights    into God’s plan and design, and that human sexual behavior should conform    with God’s creative intentions. That is, Gudorf’s philosophy is squarely    within the Thomistic Natural      Law tradition. But Gudorf argues that if we take a careful look    at the anatomy and physiology of the female sexual organs, and especially    the clitoris, instead of focusing exclusively on the male’s penis (which    is what Aquinas did), quite different conclusions about God’s plan and    design emerge and hence Christian sexual ethics turns out to be less restrictive.    In particular, Gudorf claims that the female’s clitoris is an organ whose    only purpose is the production of sexual pleasure and, unlike the mixed    or dual functionality of the penis, has no connection with procreation.    Gudorf concludes that the existence of the clitoris in the female body    suggests that God intended that the purpose of sexual activity was as much    for sexual pleasure for its own sake as it was for procreation. Therefore,    according to Gudorf, pleasurable sexual activity apart from procreation    does not violate God’s design, is not unnatural, and hence is not necessarily    morally wrong, as long as it occurs in the context of a monogamous marriage    (Sex, Body, and Pleasure, p. 65). Today we are not as confident    as Aquinas was that God’s plan can be discovered by a straightforward examination    of human and animal bodies; but such healthy skepticism about our ability    to discern the intentions of God from facts of the natural world would    seem to apply to Gudorf’s proposal as well.
 13. Debates in Sexual Ethics
The ethics of sexual behavior, as a branch of applied ethics, is no    more and no less contentious than the ethics of anything else that is usually    included within the area of applied ethics. Think, for example, of the    notorious debates over euthanasia, capital punishment, abortion, and our    treatment of lower animals for food, clothing, entertainment, and in medical    research. So it should come as no surprise than even though a discussion    of sexual ethics might well result in the removal of some confusions and    a clarification of the issues, no final answers to questions about the    morality of sexual activity are likely to be forthcoming from the philosophy    of sexuality. As far as I can tell by surveying the literature on sexual    ethics, there are at least three major topics that have received much discussion    by philosophers of sexuality and which provide arenas for continual debate.
 14. Natural Law vs. Liberal Ethics
We have already encountered one debate: the dispute between a Thomistic    Natural Law approach to sexual morality and a more liberal, secular outlook    that denies that there is a tight connection between what is unnatural    in human sexuality and what is immoral. The secular liberal philosopher    emphasizes the values of autonomous choice, self-determination, and pleasure    in arriving at moral judgments about sexual behavior, in contrast to the    Thomistic tradition that justifies a more restrictive sexual ethics by    invoking a divinely imposed scheme to which human action must conform.    For a secular liberal philosopher of sexuality, the paradigmatically morally    wrong sexual act is rape, in which one person forces himself or herself    upon another or uses threats to coerce the other to engage in sexual activity.    By contrast, for the liberal, anything done voluntarily between two or    more people is generally morally permissible. For the secular liberal,    then, a sexual act would be morally wrong if it were dishonest, coercive,    or manipulative, and Natural Law theory would agree, except to add that    the act’s merely being unnatural is another, independent reason for condemning    it morally. Kant, for example, held that “Onanism . . . is abuse of the    sexual faculty. . . . By it man sets aside his person and degrades himself    below the level of animals. . . . Intercourse between sexus homogenii . . . too is contrary to the ends of humanity”(Lectures, p. 170).    The sexual liberal, however, usually finds nothing morally wrong or nonmorally    bad about either masturbation or homosexual sexual activity. These activities    might be unnatural, and perhaps in some ways prudentially unwise, but in    many if not most cases they can be carried out without harm being done    either to the participants or to anyone else.
Natural Law is alive and well today among philosophers of sex, even  if the details do not match Aquinas’s original version. For example, the  contemporary philosopher John Finnis argues that there are morally worthless  sexual acts in which “one’s body is treated as instrumental for the securing  of the experiential satisfaction of the conscious self” (see “Is Homosexual  Conduct Wrong?”). For example, in masturbating or in being anally sodomized,  the body is just a tool of sexual satisfaction and, as a result, the person  undergoes “disintegration.” “One’s choosing self [becomes] the quasi-slave  of the experiencing self which is demanding gratification.” The worthlessness  and disintegration attaching to masturbation and sodomy actually attach,  for Finnis, to “all extramarital sexual gratification.” This is because  only in married, heterosexual coitus do the persons’ “reproductive organs  . . . make them a biological . . . unit.” Finnis begins his argument with  the metaphysically pessimistic intuition that sexual activity involves  treating human bodies and persons instrumentally, and he concludes with  the thought that sexual activity in marriage—in particular, genital intercourse—avoids  disintegrity because only in this case, as intended by God’s plan, does  the couple attain a state of genuine unity: “the orgasmic union of the  reproductive organs of husband and wife really unites them biologically.”  (See also Finnis’s essay “Law, Morality, and ‘Sexual Orientation’.”)
 15. Consent Is Not Sufficient
Another debate is about whether, when there is no harm done to third    parties to be concerned about, the fact that two people engage in a sexual    act voluntarily, with their own free and informed consent, is sufficient    for satisfying the demands of sexual morality. Of course, those in the    Natural Law tradition deny that consent is sufficient, since on their view    willingly engaging in unnatural sexual acts is morally wrong, but they    are not alone in reducing the moral significance of consent. Sexual activity    between two persons might be harmful to one or both participants, and a    moral paternalist or perfectionist would claim that it is wrong for one    person to harm another person, or for the latter to allow the former to    engage in this harmful behavior, even when both persons provide free and    informed consent to their joint activity. Consent in this case is not sufficient,    and as a result some forms of sadomasochistic sexuality turn out to be    morally wrong. The denial of the sufficiency of consent is also frequently    presupposed by those philosophers who claim that only in a committed relationship    is sexual activity between two people morally permissible. The free and    informed consent of both parties may be a necessary condition for the morality    of their sexual activity, but without the presence of some other ingredient    (love, marriage, devotion, and the like) their sexual activity remains    mere mutual use or objectification and hence morally objectionable.
In casual sex, for example, two persons are merely using each other  for their own sexual pleasure; even when genuinely consensual, these mutual  sexual uses do not yield a virtuous sexual act. Kant and Karol Wojtyla  (Pope John Paul II) take this position: willingly allowing oneself to be  used sexually by another makes an object of oneself. For Kant, sexual activity  avoids treating a person merely as a means only in marriage, since here  both persons have surrendered their bodies and souls to each other and  have achieved a subtle metaphysical unity (Lectures, p. 167). For  Wojtyla, “only love can preclude the use of one person by another” (Love  and Responsibility, p. 30), since love is a unification of persons  resulting from a mutual gift of their selves. Note, however, that the thought  that a unifying love is the ingredient that justifies sexual activity (beyond  consent) has an interesting and ironic implication: gay and lesbian sexual  relations would seem to be permissible if they occur within loving, monogamous  homosexual marriages (a position defended by the theologians Patricia Jung  and Ralph Smith, in  Heterosexism). At this point in the argument,  defenders of the view that sexual activity is justifiable only in marriage  commonly appeal to Natural Law to rule out homosexual marriage.
 16. Consent Is Sufficient
On another view of these matters, the fact that sexual activity is carried    out voluntarily by all persons involved means, assuming that no harm to    third parties exists, that the sexual activity is morally permissible.    In defending such a view of the sufficiency of consent, Thomas Mappes writes    that “respect for persons entails that each of us recognize the rightful    authority of other persons (as rational beings) to conduct their individual    lives as they see fit” (“Sexual Morality and the Concept of Using Another    Person,” p. 204). Allowing the other person’s consent to control when the    other may engage in sexual activity with me is to respect that person by    taking his or her autonomy, his or her ability to reason and make choices,    seriously, while not to allow the other to make the decision about when    to engage in sexual activity with me is disrespectfully paternalistic.    If the other person’s consent is taken as sufficient, that shows that I    respect his or her choice of ends, or that even if I do not approve of    his or her particular choice of ends, at least I show respect for his or    her ends-making capability. According to such a view of the power of consent,    there can be no moral objection in principle to casual sexual activity,    to sexual activity with strangers, or to promiscuity, as long as the persons    involved in the activity genuinely agree to engage in their chosen sexual    activities.
If Mappes’s free and informed consent criterion of the morality of sexual  activity is correct, we would still have to address several difficult questions.  How specific must consent be? When one person agrees vaguely, and in the  heat of the moment, with another person, “yes, let’s have sex,” the speaker  has not necessarily consented to every type of sexual caress or coital  position the second person might have in mind. And how explicit must consent  be? Can consent be reliably implied by involuntarily behavior (moans, for  example), and do nonverbal cues (erection, lubrication) decisively show  that another person has consented to sex? Some philosophers insist that  consent must be exceedingly specific as to the sexual acts to be carried  out, and some would permit only explicit verbal consent, denying that body  language by itself can do an adequate job of expressing the participant’s  desires and intentions. (See Alan Soble, “Antioch’s ‘Sexual Offense Policy’.”)
Note also that not all philosophers agree with Mappes and others that  fully voluntary consent is always necessary for sexual activity to be morally  permissible. Jeffrie Murphy, for example, has raised some doubts (“Some  Ruminations on Women, Violence, and the Criminal Law,” p. 218):
“Have sex with me or I will find another girlfriend” strikes me (assuming  normal circumstances) as a morally permissible threat, and “Have sex with  me and I will marry you” strikes me (assuming the offer is genuine) as  a morally permissible offer. . . . We negotiate our way through most of  life with schemes of threats and offers . . . and I see no reason why the  realm of sexuality should be utterly insulated from this very normal way  of being human.
Murphy implies that some threats are coercive and thereby undermine  the voluntary nature of the participation in sexual activity of one of  the persons, but, he adds, these types of threats are not always morally  wrong. Alternatively, we might say that in the cases Murphy describes,  the threats and offers do not constitute coercion at all and that they  present no obstacle to fully voluntary participation. (See Alan Wertheimer,  “Consent and Sexual Relations.”) If so, Murphy’s cases do not establish  that voluntary consent is not always required for sexual activity to be  morally right.
 17. What Is “Voluntary”?
As suggested by Murphy’s examples, another debate concerns the meaning    and application of the concept “voluntary.” Whether consent is only necessary    for the morality of sexual activity, or also sufficient, any moral principle    that relies on consent to make moral distinctions among sexual events presupposes    a clear understanding of the “voluntary” aspect of consent. It is safe    to say that participation in sexual activity ought not to be physically    forced upon one person by another. But this obvious truth leaves matters    wide open. Onora O’Neill, for example, thinks that casual sex is morally    wrong because the consent it purportedly involves is not likely to be sufficiently    voluntary, in light of subtle pressures people commonly put on each other    to engage in sexual activity (see “Between Consenting Adults”).
One moral ideal is that genuinely consensual participation in sexual  activity requires not a hint of coercion or pressure of any sort. Because  engaging in sexual activity can be risky or dangerous in many ways, physically,  psychologically, and metaphysically, we would like to be sure, according  to this moral ideal, that anyone who engages in sexual activity does so  perfectly voluntarily. Some philosophers have argued that this ideal can  be realized only when there is substantial economic and social equality  between the persons involved in a given sexual encounter. For example,  a society that exhibits disparities in the incomes or wealth of its various  members is one in which some people will be exposed to economic coercion.  If some groups of people (women and members of ethnic minorities, in particular)  have less economic and social power than others, members of these groups  will be therefore exposed to sexual coercion in particular, among other  kinds. One immediate application of this thought is that prostitution,  which to many sexual liberals is a business bargain made by a provider  of sexual services and a client and is largely characterized by adequately  free and informed consent, may be morally wrong, if the economic situation  of the prostitute acts as a kind of pressure that negates the voluntary  nature of his or her participation. Further, women with children who are  economically dependent on their husbands may find themselves in the position  of having to engage in sexual activity whether they want to or not, for  fear of being abandoned; these women, too, may not be engaging in sexual  activity fully voluntarily. The woman who allows herself to be nagged into  sex by her husband worries that if she says “no” too often, she will suffer  economically, if not also physically and psychologically.
The view that the presence of any kind of pressure at all is coercive,  negates the voluntary nature of participation in sexual activity, and hence  is morally objectionable has been expressed by Charlene Muehlenhard and  Jennifer Schrag (see their “Nonviolent Sexual Coercion”). They list, among  other things, “status coercion” (when women are coerced into sexual activity  or marriage by a man’s occupation) and “discrimination against lesbians”  (which discrimination compels women into having sexual relationships only  with men) as forms of coercion that undermine the voluntary nature of participation  by women in sexual activity with men. But depending on the kind of case  we have in mind, it might be more accurate to say either that some pressures  are not coercive and do not appreciably undermine voluntariness, or that  some pressures are coercive but are nevertheless not morally objectionable.  Is it always true that the presence of any kind of pressure put on one  person by another amounts to coercion that negates the voluntary nature  of consent, so that subsequent sexual activity is morally wrong?
 18. Conceptual Analysis
Conceptual philosophy of sexuality is concerned to analyze and to clarify    concepts that are central in this area of philosophy: sexual activity,    sexual desire, sexual sensation, sexual perversion, and others. It also    attempts to define less abstract concepts, such as prostitution, pornography,    and rape. I would like to illustrate the conceptual philosophy of sexuality    by focusing on one particular concept, that of “sexual activity,” and explore    in what ways it is related to another central concept, that of “sexual    pleasure.” One lesson to be learned here is that conceptual philosophy    of sexuality can be just as difficult and contentious as normative philosophy    of sexuality, and that as a result firm conceptual conclusions are hard    to come by.
 19. Sexual Activity vs. “Having Sex”
According to a notorious study published in 1999 in the Journal of    the American Medical Association (“Would You Say You ‘Had Sex’ If .    . . ?” by Stephanie Sanders and June Reinisch), a large percent of undergraduate    college students, about 60%, do not think that engaging in oral sex (fellatio    and cunnilingus) is “having sex.” This finding is at first glance very    surprising, but it is not difficult to comprehend sympathetically. To be    sure, as philosophers we easily conclude that oral sex is a specific type    of sexual activity. But “sexual activity” is a technical concept, while    “having sex” is an ordinary language concept, which refers primarily to    heterosexual intercourse. Thus when Monica Lewinsky told her confidant    Linda Tripp that she did not “have sex” with William Jefferson Clinton,    she was not necessarily self-deceived, lying, or pulling a fast one. She    was merely relying on the ordinary language definition or criterion of    “having sex,” which is not identical to the philosopher’s concept of “sexual    activity,” does not always include oral sex, and usually requires genital    intercourse.
Another conclusion might be drawn from the JAMA survey. If we  assume that heterosexual coitus by and large, or in many cases, produces  more pleasure for the participants than does oral sex, or at least that  in heterosexual intercourse there is greater mutuality of sexual pleasure  than in one-directional oral sex, and this is why ordinary thought tends  to discount the ontological significance of oral sex, then perhaps we can  use this to fashion a philosophical account of “sexual activity” that is  at once consistent with ordinary thought.
 20. Sexual Activity and Sexual Pleasure
In common thought, whether a sexual act is nonmorally good or bad is    often associated with whether it is judged to be a sexual act at all. Sometimes    we derive little or no pleasure from a sexual act (say, we are primarily    giving pleasure to another person, or we are even selling it to the other    person), and we think that even though the other person had a sexual experience,    we didn’t. Or the other person did try to provide us with sexual pleasure    but failed miserably, whether from ignorance of technique or sheer sexual    crudity. In such a case it would not be implausible to say that we did    not undergo a sexual experience and so did not engage in a sexual act.    If Ms. Lewinsky’s performing oral sex on President Clinton was done only    for his sake, for his sexual pleasure, and she did it out of consideration    for his needs and not hers, then perhaps she did not herself, after all,    engage in a sexual act.
Robert Gray is one philosopher who has taken up this line of ordinary  thought and has argued that “sexual activity” should be analyzed in terms  of the production of sexual pleasure. He asserts that “any activity might  become a sexual activity” if sexual pleasure is derived from it, and “no  activity is a sexual activity unless sexual pleasure is derived from it”  (“Sex and Sexual Perversion,” p. 61). Perhaps Gray is right, since we tend  to think that holding hands is a sexual activity when sexual pleasure is  produced by doing so, but otherwise holding hands is not very sexual. A  handshake is normally not a sexual act, and usually does not yield sexual  pleasure; but two lovers caressing each other’s fingers is both a sexual  act and produces sexual pleasure for them.
There is another reason for taking seriously the idea that sexual activities    are exactly those that produce sexual pleasure. What is it about a sexually    perverted activity that makes it sexual? The act is unnatural, we    might say, because it has no connection with one common purpose of sexual    activity, that is, procreation. But the only thing that would seem to make    the act a sexual perversion is that it does, on a fairly reliable    basis, nonetheless produce sexual pleasure. Undergarment fetishism is a    sexual perversion, and not merely, say, a “fabric” perversion, because    it involves sexual pleasure. Similarly, what is it about homosexual sexual    activities that makes them sexual? All such acts are nonprocreative, yet    they share something very important in common with procreative heterosexual    activities: they produce sexual pleasure, and the same sort of sexual pleasure.
 a. Sexual Activity Without Pleasure
Suppose I were to ask you, “How many sexual partners have you had during  the last five years”? If you were on your toes, you would ask me, before  answering, “What counts as a sexual partner?” (Maybe you are suspicious  of my question because you had read Greta Christina’s essay on this topic,  “Are We Having Sex Now or What?”) At this point I should give you an adequate  analysis of “sexual activity,” and tell you to count anyone with whom you  engaged in sexual activity according to this definition. What I should  definitely not do is to tell you to count only those people with  whom you had a pleasing or satisfactory sexual experience, forgetting about,  and hence not counting, those partners with whom you had nonmorally bad  sex. But if we accept Gray’s analysis of sexual activity, that sexual acts  are exactly those and only those that produce sexual pleasure, I should  of course urge you not to count, over those five years, anyone with whom  you had a nonmorally bad sexual experience. You will end up reporting to  me fewer sexual partners than you in fact had. Maybe that will make you  feel better.
The general point is this. If “sexual activity” is logically dependent  on “sexual pleasure,” if sexual pleasure is thereby the criterion of sexual  activity itself, then sexual pleasure cannot be the gauge of the nonmoral  quality of sexual activities. That is, this analysis of “sexual activity”  in terms of “sexual pleasure” conflates what it is for an act to be a sexual  activity with what it is for an act to be a nonmorally good sexual activity.  On such an analysis, procreative sexual activities, when the penis is placed  into the vagina, would be sexual activities only when they produce sexual  pleasure, and not when they are as sensually boring as a handshake. Further,  the victim of a rape, who has not experienced nonmorally good sex, cannot  claim that he or she was forced to engage in sexual activity, even  if the act compelled on him or her was intercourse or fellatio.
I would prefer to say that the couple who have lost sexual interest  in each other, and who engage in routine sexual activities from which they  derive no pleasure, are still performing a sexual act. But we are forbidden,  by Gray’s proposed analysis, from saying that they engage in nonmorally  bad sexual activity, for on his view they have not engaged in any sexual  activity at all. Rather, we could say at most that they tried to engage  in sexual activity but failed to do so. It may be a sad fact about our  sexual world that we can engage in sexual activity and not derive any or  much pleasure from it, but that fact should not give us reason for refusing  to call these unsatisfactory events “sexual.”
 21. References and Further Reading

Aquinas, St. Thomas. Summa Theologiae. Cambridge, Eng.: Blackfriars,      1964-76.
Augustine, St. (Aurelius). On Marriage and Concupiscence, in      The        Works of Aurelius Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, vol. 12, ed. Marcus Dods.      Edinburgh, Scot.: T. & T. Clark, 1874.
Baker, Robert, Kathleen Wininger, and Frederick Elliston, eds. Philosophy      and Sex, 3rd edition. Amherst, N.Y.: Prometheus, 1998.
Baumrin, Bernard. “Sexual Immorality Delineated,” in Robert Baker and      Frederick Elliston, eds., Philosophy and Sex, 2nd edition. Buffalo,      N.Y.: Prometheus, 1984, pp. 300-11.
Bloom, Allan. Love and Friendship. New York: Simon and Schuster,      1993.
Christina, Greta. “Are We Having Sex Now or What?” in Alan Soble, ed., The      Philosophy of Sex, 3rd edition. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield,      1997, pp. 3-8.
Finnis, John. “Law, Morality, and ‘Sexual Orientation’,” Notre Dame      Law Review 69:5 (1994), pp. 1049-76.
Finnis, John and Martha Nussbaum. “Is Homosexual Conduct Wrong? A Philosophical      Exchange,” in Alan Soble, ed., The Philosophy of Sex, 3rd edition.      Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1997, pp. 89-94.
Gray, Robert. “Sex and Sexual Perversion,” in Alan Soble, ed., The      Philosophy of Sex, 3rd edition. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield,      1997, pp. 57-66.
Grisez, Germain. The Way of the Lord Jesus. Quincy, Ill.: Franciscan      Press, 1993.
Gudorf, Christine. Sex, Body, and Pleasure: Reconstructing Christian      Sexual Ethics. Cleveland, Ohio: Pilgrim Press, 1994.
Hampton, Jean. “Defining Wrong and Defining Rape,” in Keith Burgess-Jackson,      ed., A Most Detestable Crime: New Philosophical Essays on Rape.      New York: Oxford University Press, 1999, pp. 118-56.
Held, Virginia. “Coercion and Coercive Offers,” in J. Roland Pennock      and John W. Chapman, eds., Coercion: Nomos VIX. Chicago, Ill.: Aldine,      1972, pp. 49-62.
Jung, Patricia, and Ralph Smith. Heterosexism: An Ethical Challenge.      Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1993.
Kant, Immanuel. Lectures on Ethics. Translated by Louis Infield.      New York: Harper and Row, 1963.
Kant, Immanuel. The Metaphysics of Morals . Translated by Mary Gregor.      Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Lewis, C. S. The Four Loves. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,      1960.
Mappes, Thomas. “Sexual Morality and the Concept of Using Another Person,”      in Thomas Mappes and Jane Zembaty, eds., Social Ethics, 4th edition.      New York: McGraw-Hill, 1992, pp. 203-26.
Mayo, David. “An Obligation to Warn of HIV Infection?” in Alan Soble,      ed., Sex, Love and Friendship. Amsterdam. Hol.: Editions Rodopi,      1997, pp. 447-53.
Muehlenhard, Charlene, and Jennifer Schrag. “Nonviolent Sexual Coercion,”      in A. Parrot and L. Bechhofer, eds, Acquaintance Rape. The Hidden Crime.      New York: John Wiley, 1991, pp. 115-28.
Murphy, Jeffrie. “Some Ruminations on Women, Violence, and the Criminal      Law,” in Jules Coleman and Allen Buchanan, eds., In Harm’s Way: Essays        in Honor of Joel Feinberg. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press,      1994, pp. 209-30.
Nagel, Thomas. “Sexual Perversion,” in Alan Soble, ed., The Philosophy      of Sex, 3st edition. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1997, pp.      9-20.
O’Neill, Onora. “Between Consenting Adults,” Philosophy and Public      Affairs 14:3 (1985), pp. 252-77.
Plato. Symposium. Translated by Michael Joyce, in E. Hamilton      and H. Cairns, eds., The Collected Dialogues of Plato. Princeton,      N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961, pp. 526-74.
Posner, Richard. Sex and Reason. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University      Press, 1992.
Sanders, Stephanie, and June Reinisch. “Would You Say You ‘Had Sex’      If . . . ?” Journal of the American Medical Association 281:3 (January      20, 1999), pp. 275-77.
Scruton, Roger. Sexual Desire: A Moral Philosophy of the Erotic.      New York: Free Press, 1986.
Singer, Irving. The Nature of Love, vol. 2: Courtly and Romantic.      Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Soble, Alan. “Antioch’s ‘Sexual Offense Policy’: A Philosophical Exploration,”        Journal          of Social Philosophy 28:1 (1997), pp. 22-36.
Soble, Alan.  The Philosophy of Sex and Love: An Introduction. St. Paul,      Minn.: Paragon House, 1998.
Soble, Alan. Sexual Investigations. New York: New York University Press,1996.
Soble, Alan. ed. Eros, Agape and Philia. New York: Paragon House, 1989.
Soble, Alan. ed. The Philosophy of Sex, 3rd edition. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1997.
Soble, Alan. ed. Sex, Love and Friendship. Amsterdam, Hol.: Editions      Rodopi, 1996.
Solomon, Robert, and Kathleen Higgins, eds. The Philosophy of (Erotic)      Love. Lawrence. Kan.: University Press of Kansas, 1991.
Stewart, Robert M., ed. Philosophical Perspectives on Sex and Love.      New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Vannoy, Russell. Sex Without Love: A Philosophical Exploration.      Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus, 1980.
Verene, Donald, ed. Sexual Love and Western Morality, 2nd edition.      Boston, Mass.: Jones and Bartlett, 1995.
Wertheimer, Alan. “Consent and Sexual Relations,” Legal Theory 2:2 (1996), pp. 89-112.
Wojtyla, Karol [Pope John Paul II]. Love and Responsibility.      New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1981.

Author Information
Alan Soble
Email: ags38@drexel.edu
Drexel University
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







