








St. Louis Hegelians | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














St. Louis Hegelians
The common name given to a group of amateur philosophers  founded and led by William Torrey Harris (1835-1909) and Henry  Conrad Brokmeyer (1828-1906).  Harris, a New Englander born in  Connecticut and educated at Yale, first became acquainted with  idealism through the Transcendentalists, mainly from his  attendance in 1857 at the Orphic Seer’s Conversations of Amos  Bronson Alcott (1799-1888).  The experience inspired Harris to  leave Yale before obtaining a degree, and set off west to St.  Louis to seek his vocation.  Initially he took a position  teaching shorthand in the St. Louis Public Schools, but he  quickly advanced through the system, eventually becoming  Superintendent of Schools, a position he held from 1867 to 1880.  Brokmeyer was a Prussian immigrant who arrived in New York as a  young man of sixteen.  Bold and restless in temperament, he made  his way westward, acquiring a small fortune by running a shoe  factory in Mississippi.  Desiring to further his education, he  abandoned his business pursuits to enter Georgetown University in  Kentucky, but his quarrelsome character led to his departure for  Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, only to leave that  institution as well after a heated debate with President Wayland.  The venture to New England, however, did give him an exposure to  Transcendentalism, which inspired him, like Harris, once again to  head west–first to the back country of Warren County Missouri,  where he expended his energy in a close study of German thought,  particularly Hegel, and then, in 1856, to St. Louis.
It was there that Harris and Brokmeyer met in 1858 at the St.  Louis Mercantile Library, where Harris was offering a public  lecture.  Brokmeyer convinced Harris of the significance of  Hegel’s system, and its relevance to the historical trends of  American society.  They immediately joined forces, attracting a  number of other youthful followers with intellectual ambitions,  many of whom were, like Harris, teachers in the public schools.  The nascent Hegelian movement was temporarily stalled when  Brokmeyer went off to serve as a Colonel in the Union Army during  the Civil War, but it rebounded in full force upon his return  with the formation of the St. Louis Philosophical Society in  1866, and the launching of the Journal of Speculative  Philosophy, the official organ of the Society, in 1867.
Brokmeyer was the acknowledged intellectual leader of the  movement.  He published little, but his charismatic personality,  quixotic meliorism, and extraordinary skills in argument and  debate, consistently employed in the application of Hegelian  dialectical logic, established his status as the framer of the  ideals and aims of the movement.  The manuscript of his  translation of Hegel’s Logic, although never published,  became the theoretical text of the group, copied and distributed  not only in St. Louis, but to sympathetic thinkers in other parts  of the United States.  Harris was, more than any other, the  movement’s public voice and organizing genius.  He edited the  Journal, contributing many of its articles himself.  He  also orchestrated a number of attempts to bring about a  rapprochement between the western and New England idealists,  first by inviting Alcott, Harris’s former mentor, and Ralph Waldo  Emerson to St. Louis, later by his participation in the formation  of the Concord School of Philosophy, a summer school headed by  Alcott that merged the two groups within its faculty.  (Harris  taught for all nine of the sessions of the Concord School’s  existence, from 1879 to 1887, and his disquisitions on Hegel  became the most popular of the faculty’s offerings.)  But  although these efforts furthered the influence of the St.  Louisians, they were not, because of philosophical differences,  wholly successful.
Even though Harris and Brokmeyer were first inspired to  philosophical pursuits by the Transcendentalists, the thought of  the St. Louis group was distinguished from the latter by its  greater concentration on philosophical understanding guided by  Hegelian method, without the literary and theological concerns of  the New England movement, and a greater stress on social  responsibility and reform.  The emerging views of the various  members of the group varied somewhat in details, but they shared  a common conviction in the relevance of a Hegelian social  philosophy, inspired mainly by Hegel’s The Philosophy of  Right and The Philosophy of History, to the problems  and challenges facing the American society of their day, and the  importance of education as a means of effecting necessary social  change.  Brokmeyer insisted on the necessity that thought issue  in practical action directed to the social good, and the St.  Louisians took this imperative to heart.  The emphasis on  education is evident in the pages of their journal, which were  largely dedicated to the dissemination of European idealism,  either through translations of Hegel and other German writers or  summations of their work.  They also shared a common enthusiasm  for the prospects of their home city, divining by a clever but  highly questionable use of the Hegelian dialectic what they  believed to be historical forces that would propel St. Louis into  an era of cultural supremacy in American society.
Gradually the group dissolved during the 1870s and 1880s as  the core members of the group struck out on their own to pursue  separate interests and aims.  Characteristically, education and  moral advancement were the themes of many of these individual  pursuits.  Denton Snider (1841-1925), a central figure within the  movement who eventually became its historian, set upon a course  of freelance teaching and lecturing as well as pursuing literary  ambitions.  In addition to offering lectures throughout the  eastern and midwestern United States, including the Concord  School, he founded or played a leading role in the operation of a  number of visionary educational projects, such as the Communal  University in Chicago and later St. Louis, the Chicago  Kindergarten College, and the Goethe School in Milwaukee.  Thomas  Davidson (1840-1900), another key player in the original St.  Louis movement, established the Breadwinner’s College in New York  City, a school devoted to the education of the working class, and  later established a summer school at his home in Glenmore, New  York.
The theme is echoed in the careers of the St. Louis  movement’s founders, Harris and Brokmeyer, during and after the  dissipation of the movement itself.  During his years as  Superintendent of Schools in St. Louis, Harris was a strong  proponent for the advancement of public education in Missouri.  After his involvement at the Concord School he was appointed the  United States Commissioner of Education in 1889.  Brokmeyer  entered the political arena in Missouri, and played a key role in  the state’s Constitutional Convention of 1875, which established  a legal guarantee of education for all between the ages of six  and twenty.  Brokmeyer eventually served a term as Lieutenant  Governor of the state, and acting Governor during 1876 and 1877,  but when his political prospects turned against him, he returned  to the wilderness life in numerous sojourns to the west.  For a  time he lived with the Creek Indians in Oklahoma.  In 1896 he  settled back in St. Louis, returning to a quiet life of  scholarship and reflection until his death in 1906.
Despite the fact that the members of the group produced an  extraordinary output of published writing, both in their journal  and independently, the movement’s ideas had little lasting  influence on American philosophy, due in large part to the  orthodoxy of their Hegelianism, which was soon overshadowed by  the emerging naturalism of American thought during the first  decades of the twentieth century.  The one exception was George  H. Howison (1834-1916), who came under the influence of the group  while teaching mathematics at Washington University in St. Louis.  Howison later settled in Berkeley, California, and developed a  pluralistic form of idealism that survived as the twentieth  century school of thought known as Personalism.  The most  significant contribution of the group to American thought was  their journal, which offered a much needed vehicle for the  publication of the early work of some of the most prominent  figures of the next generation of American philosophy, such as  John Dewey, William James, Charles Sanders Peirce, and Josiah  Royce.  In fact, Harris’s encouragement when a young John Dewey  timidly submitted his first philosophical essay for publication  was crucial in the budding philosopher’s decision to continue his  studies.  Although the ideas of the movement had little enduring  influence, the St. Louis Hegelians represent an important chapter  in the history of American philosophical thought and the  developing relationship between intellectual and popular culture  in the nineteenth century.
Suggestions  for Further Reading

Elizabeth Flower and Murray G. Murphy, “The Absolute Immigrates  to America: The St. Louis Hegelians” in A History of  Philosophy in America, vol. 2 (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons,  1977), pp. 463-514.
William H. Goetzmann, ed., The American Hegelians: An  Intellectual Episode in the History of Western America (New  York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1973).
Frances A. Harmon, The Social Philosophy of the St. Louis  Hegelians (New York: Columbia University Press, 1943).
Henry A. Pochmann, German Culture in America, Philosophical  and Literary Influences, 1600-1900 (Madison, WS: University  of Wisconsin Press, 1961).
Denton J. Snider, The St. Louis Movement in Philosophy,  Literature, Education, Psychology, with Chapters of  Autobiography (St. Louis: Sigma Publishing, 1920).

Author Information
Richard Field
Email: RFIELD(at)nwmissouri.edu
Northwest Missouri State University
U. S. A.
The IEP is actively seeking an author who will write a replacement article.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







