








Ellacuría, Ignacio | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Ignacio Ellacuría (1930—1989)
Ignacio Ellacuría, a naturalized citizen of El Salvador, was born in Spain in 1930.  He joined the Jesuits in 1947 and was quickly sent to El Salvador, where he lived and worked for the next forty-two years, except for periods when he was pursuing his education in Ecuador, Spain, and West Germany.  He developed an important and novel  contribution to Latin American Liberation Philosophy.  The body of thought known as Liberation Philosophy developed in Latin America in the second half of the Twentieth Century.  It grew out of the works of philosophers working in Peru (A. Salazar Bondy) and Mexico (Leopoldo Zea), and quickly spread throughout Latin America.  It resulted from efforts by these philosophers to create a Latin American philosophy by looking at how the discipline could help to make sense of Latin American reality.  That reality, as distinct from the European (and later North American) context in which the modern Western philosophical tradition developed, is one of  dependence on economic and political (and to some extent cultural) factors that are beyond one’s control.  In thematizing dependency, Latin American philosophy developed a liberation philosophy that focused on the social and personal imperative to overcome dependency as the path toward the fullness of one’s humanity, given the conditions of dependency.  There are at least five different schools within Latin American liberation philosophy (see Cerutti in the Bibliography below), but all are grounded in the attempt to use philosophy to understand the Latin American reality of dependency and the need to overcome it.
Table of Contents

 Life 
 Ellacuría’s Philosophy of Liberation 
 References and Further Reading

 1. Life
Ellacuría’s initial training in philosophy was in the Neo-Scholasticism required at that time of all Jesuits.  Later he studied     Ortega, Bergson, Heidegger, phenomenology, and the existentialists.  All of these influenced him, but the key influences in the make     up of his mature philosophical thought were Hegel, Marx, and the Basque philosopher Xavier Zubiri (1898-1983).  Ellacuría worked on     his doctorate under Zubiri from 1962 to 1965, writing a dissertation that reached some 1100 pages on the concept of essence in     Zubiri’s thought.   He also studied theology with the great Heideggerian Jesuit, Karl Rahner, and had finished all the requirements     for a second PhD, but did not write the dissertation (which he was also going to write under Zubiri).  For the next 18 years, until     Zubiri’s death in 1983, they were close collaborators, with Ellacuría returning to Spain from El Salvador for a few months each year     to facilitate their work.  The two worked together on most of Zubiri’s texts and talks, eventually reaching the point where Zubiri     would not publish something, or even present a lecture, without first showing the material to Ellacuría.
Zubiri is a major figure in 20th century Spanish philosophy and has had a lot of influence in Latin America, largely through the     efforts of Ellacuría, but his work is not well known in the countries more traditionally associated with Continental Philosophy     (France and Germany) or in the Anglo-American tradition.  By the age of 23, Zubiri had finished both a PhD in theology at the     Gregorian University and a PhD in philosophy at the University of Madrid.  At 28 he was named to the prestigious chair in the history     of philosophy at the University of Madrid, and for the next few years he traveled widely in Europe to study with experts in many     different fields: philosophy with Husserl and Heidegger, physics with Schrödinger and De Broglie, as well as biology and mathematics     with luminaries of the day.  Zubiri also taught in Paris at the Institut Catholique and at the University of Barcelona, but in 1942     he left formal academia and for the rest of his life conducted seminars on his own.
From among a large number of very important publications, his two most important are On Essence (1963) and the three-volume     work, Sentient Intelligence (1980-83).  Ellacuría, who knew all of Zubiri’s work, was particularly familiar with these two     works: his doctoral dissertation was on the former, and he worked very closely with Zubiri to bring the latter to publication before     Zubiri’s death.
Zubiri created a systematic philosophy grounded in a re-configuring and overcoming of the distinction between epistemology and     metaphysics, between the knower and the known (for more, see the section below on Ellacuría’s philosophy).  There are now various     interpretations of Zubiri’s work (among others, phenomenological, Nietzschean, praxical) with Ellacuría heading up the     historical/metaphysical interpretation.  Although there is no agreement among Zubirian scholars as to which among these is the better     interpretation, the fact that Zubiri adopted Ellacuría as his closest collaborator for the last 20 years of his life has to lend some     weight to Ellacuría’s interpretation
Ellacuría was murdered in 1989 – along with five other Jesuits with whom he lived, their housekeeper and her daughter – at the     hands of an elite, US-trained squadron of the Salvadoran army.  The murders came towards the end of El Salvador’s long civil war     (1980-1992) between a right-wing government and leftist guerillas.  At the time of his death, Ellacuría was president of the     country’s prestigious Jesuit university, the University of Central America (UCA), as well as chair of its philosophy department and     editor of many of its scholarly publications.  In his quarter century with the UCA, the last ten years as its president, he had     played a principle role in molding it into a university whose full institutional power – that is, through its research, teaching and     publications – was directed towards uncovering the causes of poverty and oppression in El Salvador.  In addition, he spoke out     frequently on these topics as a regular contributor to the country’s newspapers, radio and television programs.  He also addressed     these topics frequently in his scholarly publications on philosophy and theology.  These were the reasons behind his murder.
During his lifetime Ellacuría was known, primarily, as one of the principle contributors to Latin American liberation     theology.  However, he also spent the last two decades of his life elaborating a liberation philosophy.  The latter     work was left, at the time of his murder, unfinished, unpublished, and scattered across many different writings.  In the years since     his death, a number of scholars have pieced together his philosophical thought, and it is now possible to argue that Ellacuría had a     well-developed philosophy that represents an important contribution to Latin American liberation philosophy.
 2. Ellacuría’s Philosophy of Liberation
Ellacuría argued that philosophy, in order to remain true to itself, must be a philosophy of liberation.  He begins with     the assertion that it is the responsibility of philosophy to help us in figuring out what reality is and in situating ourselves     within reality.  For Ellacuría, human reality is historical and social: the range of possibilities in which the freedom of any given     individual’s life must be exercised is the result of both past human actions and the society in which the individual lives.  Human     actions accrete as history, and within this reality individuals and societies are able to realize some of the possibilities handed     over by the past, in the process creating new possibilities to hand over to future generations.  There is progress in reality, from     the physical to the biological to the praxical, each of these representing a further unfolding of an ever more complex reality.  In     the realm of praxis (his word for human action to change reality), human beings act to realize a wider range of possibility: praxis     seeks to realize a fuller praxis.  Thus, praxis realizes a gradual increase in liberty: praxis gradually liberates liberty.
Human beings, as praxical beings, are responsible for the further unfolding of reality, i.e., for the realization of a reality in     which all praxical beings can fully realize themselves as such.  Ellacuría argues that the vantage point from which one can see most     clearly what reality unfolding as history has and has not delivered, is the perspective of the marginalized.  Thus, the philosophy of     history must make a preferential option for the marginalized, i.e., it must be a philosophy of liberation.
Ellacuría’s liberation philosophy begins with a critique grounded in a Zubirian metaphysics that is radically critical of all     forms of idealism, including most of what has passed for realism in the history of Western philosophy.  This critique argues that the     Western tradition made a fundamental error, from Parmenides on, in separating sensation and the intellect, an error which distorted     all subsequent philosophy.  This error resulted in the “logification of intelligence” and the “entification of reality.”  By the     former, Zubiri means that the full powers of the intellect have been reduced to a predicative logos, i.e., a logos whose function is     to determine what things are, in themselves and in relation to other things.  Zubiri argues that while this is a vital part of     intelligence, it is not the only part and not the most fundamental part, but Western philosophy reduced intelligence to this     predicative logos.  In doing so, the object of logos, i.e., the being of entities, became the sum total of reality: reality became     entified.  These two distortions (the logification of intelligence and entification of reality) can only be overcome by the     recognition that sensation and intellection are not separate, that they are two aspects of a single faculty.  Zubiri called this     faculty the sentient intellect.  By this term he meant that, for human beings, the intellect is always sentient and sensation is     always intelligent.  The two faculties of sensation and intelligence are, for human beings, one and the same faculty.  This new,     human faculty, the “sentient intellect,” is Zubiri’s candidate for the specific difference of human beings as a species: a new type     of sensation that is essentially different from the sense faculty of other animals, different by the addition of intelligence.
In what way is human sensation essentially different than the sensation of other animals?  For Zubiri, part of every human     sensation, but absent in animal sensation, is the awareness that the object sensed is real, i.e., that it is has the property     of being something in and of itself, independent from me, that it is not a willful extension of me.  This recognition of the real as     real is the fundamental act of the intelligence; it is the intellectual act that is part and parcel, structurally, inextricably, of     every act of human sensation.  Thus, through the unitary faculty of the sentient intellect we apprehend reality as real.  The     consequence of this is that we are always already installed in reality.  There is no question about how the mind reaches what is     real, no need to build a bridge between the mind and reality.
The intellect, like the rest of the body, evolved as a response to challenges posed by the environment.  Animals respond to     stimuli while humans are confronted with possible realities.  Animals are faced with a predetermined cast of responses to a given     stimuli.  But human beings in any given situation have an open spectrum of options from among which we must choose.  We     are, in effect, faced with the possibilities of many different realities, and our choices contribute to the determination of     reality as it is realized; thus the name that Zubiri gives to human beings: the “reality animal.”  The openness of the options facing     us is the structural basis of our freedom.  Freedom is not something mysterious but a result of the evolutionary pressures that lead     to the emergence of a sentient intelligence.  The evolutionary niche occupied by human beings is one in which the cast of responses     to a stimulus grew to the point where there was no longer anything automatic about which possible response would be enacted.  Our     niche is the one where the huge number of possible responses opened up different potential realities, allowing us more fully to     exploit reality’s possibilities.  In other words, our niche is precisely the freedom to choose from among the huge number of     possible responses, i.e., from among the huge number of possible realities.  To manage this operation of choosing, animal     sensation evolved into the sentient intellect.
So, according to Zubirian metaphysics, human beings are always already installed in reality as the part of reality whose     actions determine future reality: humans are the part of reality that now unfolds further reality.  In previous eras, the unfolding     of reality took place by physical and biological forces, but now it is human forces (praxis) that unfolds reality.  This is not to     say that physical and biological forces are no longer present.  They are present, and continue to form the foundation of praxis, but     praxis outstrips them.  An authentic praxis, however, must recognize its foundation in biology and physics – that is why the physical     and biological needs of human beings must be met in order for the fullness of human praxis to be realizable.  Thus, an authentic     praxis must strive for a reality in which the physical and biological needs of all humans are met.
Ellacuría concludes from all of this that the primary question facing human beings – metaphysical and ethical at once – is:     given that we are always already in reality, what is the proper way to engage it?  Ellacuría characterizes Zubiri’s  intellectual     motto as “to come as close as possible, intellectually, to the reality of things.”  Western philosophy “had not found an adequate way     to shoulder responsibility for reality [hacerse cargo de la realidad].”  The search for the right way to engage reality was     the motivation for Ellacuría’s work. For Ellacuría, humans are now shouldered with responsibility for reality in the sense of being     charged with the task of figuring out what is the proper way of exercising the fundamental freedom opened up by the advent, within     evolution, of the sentient intellect.  In this sense, human beings are the responsible part of reality, i.e., the part of reality     whose task it is to figure out how to respond to reality thereby creating a new reality unfolded out of the previous reality.  In     order for humans to properly exercise this responsibility, we must discern the direction in which reality needs to be taken.
The sentient intellect evolved to enable us to act more effectively in insuring our own survival.  This is not selfish, as it     may at first sound, given the element of responsibility that comes along with the sentient intellect.  As the reality animal, our     actions decide between various possible future realities.  Thus, as the responsible part of reality, we are now charged with     assisting in the further realization of reality.  Ellacuría gives the special name of “praxis” to this action that determines     reality.
If we look at the development of reality, we can discern a progression from matter, to life, to human life.  This progression     has been under the control of, first, physical forces, then biological forces, and now, with the evolution of the being with sentient     intelligence, the progressive unfolding of reality is subject to the force of praxis.  Thus there is a gradual liberation of more     developed forces.  Subsequent forces do not erase the earlier ones, but rather subsume them dialectically.  Thus, human praxis cannot     ignore the physical and biological needs of reality: these are the imperatives that must be satisfied on the way to the full     realization of praxis itself.  Reality has delivered, liberated, successively more developed forces, each layered over the     previous: the biological on top of the physical, and the praxical on top of the biological.  The direction of this process can be     seen: praxis is the most advanced force reality has developed, and praxis must now take its place as the force that most drives the     further unfolding of reality (just as physical and biological forces had, successively, taken that place previously).  Since the     essence of praxis is freedom, human beings must now exercise our freedom such that we further the proper development of reality.  To     remain true to our essence, and true to the essence of reality, we must act so as to further the development, the spread, of praxis.      Thus, the direction of this process of liberation is the liberation of liberty itself, a process for which the reality animal, the     praxical being, is responsible.  Thus the full realization of reality entails this: praxical beings acting to bring about the     realization of the reality in which all praxical beings (that is, all human beings) can realize the fullness of their praxical essence.      In other words, physical and biological forces brought about human beings; but the nature of human beings is such that we are now     responsible for the further and fuller realization of reality, which realization is precisely the liberation of all human beings such     that they can realize the fullness of their essence. Thus Ellacuría is able to argue that the metaphysics of reality demands a     liberatory praxis from us: liberation, because of the essence of human beings and the nature of reality, is a metaphysical     imperative.
We can begin to see the prescriptions that emerge from the foregoing analysis.  Ellacuría’s liberation philosophy allows him     to argue that the essence of being human demands that society be structured in such a way as to meet the physical and biological     needs of human beings at an adequate level, i.e., a level that frees us to pursue our essence as praxical beings.  Further, his     analysis suggests that it is the duty of those of us who enjoy a wider exercise of freedom to dedicate our talents and efforts     towards the construction of such a society: our essence as the leading edge of reality that is now responsible for the further     unfolding of reality demands that we assist in the establishment of a reality in which praxis is more fully realized, i.e., a reality     in which more people (ultimately, all people) are freed from basic wants (inflicted on them by poverty) so that they can exercise     their praxis.  In other words, the full self-realization of the privileged lies in their enlisting themselves in the struggles of the     oppressed.  This does not mean that the privileged have to become oppressed.  Rather, it means that they should use the education and     power delivered to them by their socially and historically conditioned privilege to further the struggles of the oppressed.  Note     that this is not paternalistic.  The struggles of the oppressed represent the leading edge of reality’s further development.  The     endeavors of the privileged apart from these struggles represent dead-end dilly-dallying (no matter how important they seem to those     engaged in them) that does not further the humanization of reality and, thus, will not become an enduring part of human history.  Far     from paternalism, what saves the privileged from the meaningless pursuits with which they are wont to fill their time, and thus from     a meaningless life, is the decision to lend their efforts to further the cause of the oppressed.
Thus, with Zubirian realism and in creative dialogue with Marx, Ellacuría undertook, from the perspective of the poor of the Third     World, the project of forging a philosophy that recognized the material nature of being human – and thus the need to take into     account the structures of poverty and oppression – while holding open the possibility of a transcendent realm, a realm one and the     same with the material realm (actually part of the material realm) in which can exist human freedom and perhaps even God.  Ellacuría     was constructing a liberation philosophy in the service of the concrete needs of the Latin American people and of the Third World in     general. It is a project in the service of which Ellacuría took great strides, but which remained unfinished at his death.
 3. References and Further Reading
There still remain a number of unpublished pieces that are important to Ellacuría’s liberation philosophy. These consist primarily of extensive notes he took for the courses he taught at the UCA. These, and all of Ellacuría’s published and unpublished writings, are located in the Ignacio Ellacuría Archives at the Universidad Centroamericana (UCA) in San Salvador, El Salvador.

Burke, Kevin (2000). The Ground Beneath the Cross: The     Theology of Ignacio Ellacuría, Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

In English, this book contains good chapters (chs. 2-4) on the philosophical foundation of Ellacuría’s theological thought.


Cerutti, Horacio (1992). La Filosofia de la Liberación     Latinoamericana, Mexico City: FCE.

The best overview of Latin American liberation philosophy, though the book was written before Ellacuría’s contributions to the topic were widely known. Thus, Cerutti charts four main currents of Latin American liberation philosophy. Ellacuría’s contributions represent a fifth current.


Ellacuría, Ignacio (2000-2002). Escritos Teológicos [ET], four volumes, San Salvador: UCA Editores.

Some philosophically important pieces are also collected here.


Ellacuría, Ignacio (1996-2001). Escritos Filosóficos [EF], three volumes, San Salvador: UCA Editores.

His scores of important philosophical essays have been collected here.


Ellacuría, Ignacio (1999). Escritos Universitarios [EU], San Salvador: UCA Editores.

Some philosophically important pieces are also collected here.


 Ellacuría, Ignacio (1993). Veinte Años de Historia en El Salvador: Escritos Políticos [VA], three volumes, second edition, San Salvador: UCA     Editores.

Some philosophically important pieces are also collected here.


Ellacuría, Ignacio (1990). Filosofía de la Realidad Histórica, San Salvador: UCA Editores.

Ellacuría’s main philosophical work. This 600-page book was written and revised a couple of times in the early 1970s. It was never finished (there are indications in his notes that he intended to write more chapters) but it is fairly polished and the best indication of the scope and force of his argument for liberation philosophy.


Hassett, John & Hugh Lacey, eds. (1991). Towards a Society that Serves Its People: The Intellectual Contribution of El     Salvador’s Murdered Jesuits [TSSP], Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

English translations of eight of his essays (philosophical, theological and political).


Samour, Héctor (2002). Voluntad de     Liberación: El Pensamiento Filosófico de Ignacio Ellacuría, San Salvador: UCA Editores.

The most thorough presentation of Ellacuría’s philosophical thought. Samour is the scholar who has done the most to pull together, from the thousands of pages of unpublished and published material, Ellacuría’s liberation philosophy and this comprehensive book is the result of his labors.


Whitfield, Teresa (1995). Paying the Price: Ignacio Ellacuría and the Murdered     Jesuits of El Salvador, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

The best intellectual biography on Ellacuría.



From among all of the collected essays, the most important for understanding Ellacuría’s liberation philosophy are the following:

“Filosofía y Política” [1972], VA-1, pp. 47-62.
“Liberación: Misión y Carisma de la Iglesia” [1973], ET-2, pp. 553-584.
“Diez Años Después: ¿Es Posible una Universidad Distinta?” [1975], EU, pp. 49-92 (an English translation is available in TSSP, pp. 177-207).
“Hacia una Fundamentación del Método Teológico Latinoamericana” [1975], ET-1, pp. 187-218.
“Filosofía, ¿Para Qué?” [1976], EF-3, pp. 115-132.
“Fundamentación Biológica de la Ética” [1979], EF-3, pp, 251-269.
“Universidad y Política” [1980], VA-1, pp. 17-46.
“El Objeto de la Filosofía” [1981], VA-1, pp. 63-92.
“Función Liberadora de la Filosofía” [1985], VA-1, pp. 93-122.
“La Superación del Reduccionismo Idealista en Zubiri” [1988], EF-3, pp. 403-430.
“El Desafío de las Mayorías Populares” (1989), EU, pp. 297-306 (an English translation is available in TSSP, pp. 171-176).
“En Torno al Concepto y a la Idea de Liberación” [1989], ET-1, pp. 629-657.
“Utopía y Profetismo en América Latina” [1989], ET-2, pp. 233-294 (an English translation is available in TSSP, pp.     44-88).

Author Information
David I. Gandolfo
Email: david.gandolfo@furman.edu
Furman University
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







