








Political Realism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Political Realism
Political realism is a theory of political  philosophy that attempts to explain, model, and prescribe political  relations. It takes as its assumption that power is (or ought to be)  the primary end of political action, whether in the domestic or  international arena. In the domestic arena, the theory asserts that  politicians do, or should, strive to maximize their power, whilst on  the international stage, nation states are seen as the primary agents  that maximize, or ought to maximize, their power. The theory is  therefore to be examined as either a prescription of what ought to be  the case, that is, nations and politicians ought to pursue power or  their own interests, or as a description of the ruling state of  affairs-that nations and politicians only pursue (and perhaps only can  pursue) power or self-interest.  
  Political  realism in essence reduces to the political-ethical principle that  might is right. The theory has a long history, being evident in  Thucydides’ Pelopennesian War. It was expanded on by  Machiavelli in The Prince, and others such as Thomas Hobbes,  Spinoza, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau followed (the theory was given  great dramatical portrayed in Shakespeare’s Richard III). In  the late nineteenth century it underwent a new incarnation in the form  of social darwinism, whose adherents explained social and hence  political growth in terms of a struggle in which only the fittest  (strongest) cultures or polities would survive. Political realism  assumes that interests are to be maintained through the exercise of  power, and that the world is characterised by competing power bases.  In international politics, most political theorists emphasise the  nation state as the relevant agent, whereas Marxists focus on classes.  Prior to the French Revolution in which nationalism as a political  doctrine truly entered the world’s stage, political realism involved  the political jurisdictions of ruling dynasties, whilst in the  nineteenth century, nationalist sentiments focused realists’  attentions on the development of the nation-state, a policy that was  later extended to include imperialist ambitions on the part of the  major Western powers-Britain and France, and even Belgium, Germany and  the United States were influenced by imperialism. Nationalist  political realism later extended into geo-political theories, which  perceive the world to be divided into supra-national cultures, such as  East and West, North and South, Old World and New World, or focusing  on the pan-national continental aspirations of Africa, Asia, etc.  Whilst the social darwinist branch of political realism may claim that  some nations are born to rule over others (being ‘fitter’ for the  purpose, and echoing Aristotle’s ruminations on slavery in Book 1 of  the The Politics), generally political realists focus on the  need or ethic of ensuring that the relevant agent (politician, nation,  culture) must ensure its own survival by securing its own needs and  interests before it looks to the needs of others.    
  To explore the various shades and implications of the  theory, its application to international affairs is examined.    
  Descriptive political realism commonly holds that the  international community is characterized by anarchy, since there is no  overriding world government that enforces a common code of rules.  Whilst this anarchy need not be chaotic, for various member states of  the international community may engage in treaties or in trading  patterns that generate an order of sorts, most theorists conclude that  law or morality does not apply beyond the nation’s boundaries.  Arguably political realism supports Hobbes’s view of the state of  nature, namely that the relations between self-seeking political  entities are necessarily a-moral. Hobbes asserts that without a  presiding government to legislate codes of conduct, no morality or  justice can exist: “Where there is no common Power, there is no  Law: where no Law, no Injustice¼ if  there be no Power erected, or not great enough for our security; every  man will and may lawfully rely on his own strength and art, for  caution against all other men.” (Hobbes, Leviathan, Part  I, Ch.13 ‘Of Man’, and Part II, Ch.17, ‘Of Commonwealth’) Accordingly,  without a supreme international power or tribunal, states view each  other with fear and hostility, and conflict, or the threat thereof, is  endemic to the system.  
  Another proposition is that a nation can only advance  its interests against the interests of other nations; this implies  that the international environment is inherently unstable. Whatever  order may exists breaks down when nations compete for the same  resources, for example, and war may follow. In such an environment,  the realists argue, a nation has only itself to depend on.  
  Either descriptive political realism is true or it is  false. If it is true, it does not follow, however, that morality ought  not to be applied to international affairs: what ought to be does not  always follow from what is. A strong form of descriptive political  realism maintains that nations are necessarily self-seeking, that they  can only form foreign policy in terms of what the nation can gain, and  cannot, by their very nature, cast aside their own interests. However,  if descriptive realism is held, it is as a closed theory, which means  that it can refute all counter-factual evidence on its own terms (for  example, evidence of a nation offering support to a neighbour as an  ostensible act of altruism, is refuted by pointing to some  self-serving motive the giving nation presumably has–it would  increase trade, it would gain an important ally, it would feel guilty  if it didn’t, and so on), then any attempt to introduce morality into  international affairs would prove futile. Examining the soundness of  descriptive political realism depends on the possibility of knowing  political motives, which in turn means knowing the motives of the  various officers of the state and diplomats. The complexity of the  relationship between officers’ actions, their motives, subterfuge, and  actual foreign policy makes this a difficult if not impossible task,  one for historians rather than philosophers. Logically, the closed  nature of descriptive realism implies that a contrary proposition that  nations serve no interests at all, or can only serve the interests of  others, could be just as valid. The logical validity of the three  resulting theories suggests that preferring one position to another is  an arbitrary decision-i.e., an assumption to be held, or not. This  negates the soundness of descriptive realism; it is not a true or  false description of international relations but is reduced to an  arbitrary assumption. Assumptions can be tested against the evidence,  but in themselves cannot be proved true or false. Finally, what is the  case need not be, nor need it ought to be.  
  That  the present international arena of states is characterized by the lack  of an overarching power is an acceptable description. Evidentially,  war has been common enough to give support to political realism-there  have been over 200 wars and conflicts since the signing of the Treaty  of Westphalia in 1648. The seemingly anarchic state of affairs has led  some thinkers to make comparisons with domestic anarchy, when a  government does not exist to rule or control a nation. Without a world  power, they may reason, war, conflict, tension, and insecurity have  been the regular state of affairs; they may then conclude that just as  a domestic government removes internal strife and punishes local  crime, so too ought a world government control the activities of  individual states-overseeing the legality of their affairs and  punishing those nations that break the laws, and thereby calming the  insecure atmosphere nations find themselves in. However, the ‘domestic  analogy’ makes the presumption that relations between individuals and  relations between states are the same. Christian Wolff, for example,  holds that “since states are regarded as individual free persons  living in a state of nature, nations must also be regarded in relation  to each other as individual free persons living in a state of nature.”  (Jus Gentium Methodo Scientifica Pertractatum Trans. Joseph  Drake. Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1934, §2, p.9). Such an argument  involves the collectivization of individuals and/or the  personification of states: realism may describe nations as individuals  acting upon the world stage to further their own interests, but behind  the concept of ‘France’ or ‘South Africa’ exist millions of unique  individuals, who may or may not agree with the claims for improving  the national interest. Some (e.g., Gordon Graham, Ethics and  International Relations, 1997) claim that the relationships  between states and their civilians are much more different than those  between nation states, since individuals can hold beliefs and can  suffer whereas states cannot. If the domestic analogy does not hold,  arguably a different theory must be proposed to explain the state of  international affairs, which either means revising political realism  to take into account the more complex relationship between a  collective and individual entities, or moving to a alternative theory  of international relations.  
  Beyond the  descriptive propositions of political realism, prescriptive political  realism argues that whatever the actual state of international  affairs, nations should pursue their own interests. This theory  resolves into various shades depending on what the standard of the  national interest is claimed to be and the moral permissibility of  employing various means to desired ends. Several definitions may be  offered as to what ought to comprise the national interest: more often  than not the claims invoke the need to be economically and politically  self-sufficient, thereby reducing dependency on untrustworthy nations.    
  The argument in supporting the primacy of  self-sufficiency as forming the national interest has a long history:  Plato and Aristotle both argued in favour of economic self-sufficiency  on grounds of securing a nation’s power-nations, they both reasoned,  should only import non-necessary commodities. The power of this  economic doctrine has been often been used to support political  realism: in the eighteenth century especially, political theorists and  mercantilists maintained that political power could only be sustained  and increased through reducing a nation’s imports and increasing its  exports. The common denominator between the two positions is the  proposition that a nation can only grow rich at the expense of others.  If England’s wealth increases, France’s must concomitantly decrease.  This influential tier supporting political realism is, however,  unsound. Trade is not necessarily exclusively beneficial to one party:  it is often mutually beneficial. The economists Adam Smith and David  Ricardo explained the advantages to be gained by both parties from  free, unfettered trade. Nonetheless, the realist may admit this and  retort that despite the gains from trade, nations should not rely on  others for their sustenance, or that free trade ought not to be  supported since it often implies undesired cultural changes. In that  respect, the nation’s interests are defined as lying over and above  any material benefits to be gained from international collaboration  and co-operation. The right to a separate cultural identity is a  separate  
  Political realists are often  characterised as a-moralists, that any means should be used to uphold  the national interest, but a poignant criticism is that the definition  of morality is being twisted to assume that acting in one’s own or  one’s nation’s interests is immoral or amoral at best. This is an  unfair claim against serving one’s national interest, just as claiming  that any self-serving action is necessarily immoral on the personal  level. The discussion invokes the ethics of impartiality; those who  believe in a universal code of ethics argue that a self-serving action  that cannot be universalized is immoral. However, universalism is not  the only standard of ethical actions. Partiality, it can be claimed,  should play a role in ethical decisions; partialists deem it absurd  that state officials should not give their own nation greater moral  weight over other nations, just as it would be absurd for parents to  give equal consideration to their children and others’ children. But  if morality is employed in the sense of being altruistic, or at least  universalistic, then political realists would rightly admit that  attempting to be moral will be detrimental to the national interest or  for the world as a whole, and therefore morality ought to be ignored.  But, if morality accepts the validity of at least some self-serving  actions, then ipso facto political realism may be a moral  political doctrine.  
Author Information
Alexander Moseley Email: alexandermoseley@icloud.com
United Kingdom   





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







