








Pacifism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Pacifism
Pacifism is the theory that peaceful rather than violent or belligerent  relations should govern human intercourse and that arbitration, surrender,  or migration should be used to resolve disputes. Pacifism is as much an  element of Western thinking as is the notion of Just  War Theory, the argument that the state may legitimately or morally  bear arms. While most people accept the necessity of war, conscientious  objectors (or martyrs in much of European history) have often been accorded  a special recognition for their moral bravery in refusing to take up arms.
The philosophical study of pacifism requires examining a variety of  aspects of the broad proposal, as well as an investigation as to its consequences.  Pacifism relates to war as well as to domestic injustices and repressive  policies. It can be studied in terms of its coherence as a deontological,  or intrinsic, value as well as in terms of the beneficial effects it seeks.  Examination of the broad theory draws our attention to a vast range of  possible ethical meanings and issues that the committed pacifist or critic  must consider. The doctrine of absolute pacifism is first dealt with, before  turning to an examination of the more flexible doctrines of pacifism and conditional  pacifism.
Table of Contents

 General Pacifism 

 Killing 
 The Nature of Violence 
 The Use of Force 
 Innocents 


 The Ethics of Pacifism 

 Absolute Pacifism 

 Deontological Pacifism 
 Consequentialist Pacifism 
 Absolute Pacifism Summarized 


 Conditional Pacifism 

 Conditional Deontological Pacifism 
 Conditional Utilitarian Pacifism 


 Pacificism 


 Conclusion 

 1. General Pacifism
The best place to begin an analysis of pacifism is with the absolutist  argument that all forms of violence, war, and/or killing are unconditionally  wrong. The proposed ideal is that social intercourse should be completely  non-violent and peaceful, and conflicts which may arise should be dealt  with through arbitration and compromise rather than with recourse to violent  means. Absolutist pacifism asserts that peace is intrinsically a good to  be upheld either as a duty or on the consequentialist grounds that it is  more conducive to human welfare than any use of violence or force.
The ethical evaluation of these two positions, the deontological and  the consequentialist, provides the traditional framework in which ethicists  examine pacifism. But what becomes an immediate concern is the kind of  pacifism that is intended. Pacifism for many means an anti-war stance,  but pacifism can also be construed as a broader theory incorporating doctrines  of non-violence, passive resistance, and moral purity. Although the emphasis  on pacifism as an anti-war doctrine is the focus of this article, the other  nuances of the theory need to be noted.
The first issue to deal with is that while pacifism emphasizes the role  that peace should play, there are three general aspects derived from the  nature of peaceful relations. First, there is the absolute prohibition  of war; second, the absolute prohibition of violence (or force); and  third, the absolute prohibition of killing. The three areas of ethical  investigation certainly overlap, and most pacifists hold an ethic of non-violence,  which underpins both their disdain of killing and of war. Others, however,  deny any moral validity to war but accept the use of force or violence  (and even killing) under criteria established by the rule of law; some  seek a purely non-violent way of life, where as other pacifists are solely  nuclear pacifists in that they accept the use of conventional war but not  nuclear war.
Before moving onto an ethical analysis of pacifism, the concepts of  killing, violence, force, and innocents are reviewed.
 a. Killing
Morally, the topic of killing is intricate and complex, deserving a  separate consideration, however, for the purposes of examining the various  possible readings of pacifism, it can be generally asserted that pacifists  cannot condone killing. Their beliefs emphasize the sanctity of human life,  according it a special moral status that necessitates strong justifications  for the injuring, harming, restraining, or killing of another. Absolute  pacifists deny that there can be any justification for killing. The Mosaic  command,  thou shalt not kill  resounds throughout much Western culture  and philosophy and is the starting point for absolutist prohibitions on  the killing of people in the Western philosophical tradition.
Ethically, the problem of killing divides between passive and active  killing as well as intentional, unintentional, and foreseeable variations.  The pacifist needs to relate his general moral outlook to these particular  areas. For example, would the pacifist prohibit all forms of killing, including  mercy killings and killings in self-defense? Is it any form of killing  that the pacifist prohibits, or only those of innocents  lives, or those  in foreign territories? Or does the pacifist draw a distinction between  killing and murder, with the implication that killing could be morally  acceptable (e.g., abortion, euthanasia, capital punishment), whereas the  intentional killing of an innocent be absolutely immoral? Even so, a pacifist  could consistently claim that he would prefer to die rather than raise  his fist to protect himself. Kahlil Gibran argues: “If my survival caused  another to perish, then death would be sweeter and more beloved.” (The  Voice of the Poet). In such ethics, the evil of killing in self-defense  outweighs the moral value of the victim s own life and the moral purity  of the pacifist is to be upheld as the governing ethic. But self-immolation  and especially sacrifice are ultimately illogical, for if all were to sacrifice  themselves in the quest for moral purity, none would be left to continue  the human race. However, the pursuit of purity can also be criticized for  being other-worldly, unrealistic, and utopian, and in turn purification  policies have also often become crusades against  sinners  and  heretics  (cf. Barrington Moore s Moral Purity and Persecution in History),  which even the Buddhist religion is not averse to accepting. The pacifist  who seeks, regardless of the actions of others, moral purity often requires  subsidizing or free rides on the moral  impurity  of others. The pacifist  may reply that it is the duty of only a select élite to be morally  pure (a priestly class) or that only a select élite are capable  of such purity and that they must so act to become semi-divine agents on  earth. The reply is cogent, however it admits a moral division in humanity,  namely that some are morally better than others and that others live to  serve the priests, an argument that moral egalitarians (“each to count  for one and no more than one” Bentham) would reject.
While a few pacifists (especially in the religious vein) may accept  the absolute ideal of peace, most have to justify their enjoyment of peace  at the expense of others who actively defend the lives of their fellow  citizens as well as those of the pacifists. The dilemma is captured well  in a quotation from Clifford Simmons in Paskins and Dockrill s Ethics  of War.
“I could not stand aside from the experiences of others…I  still believed that the position of the pacifist was ultimately right but  I was beginning to realize that, at the same time, I could not stand aside  from the struggle which was engulfing my contemporaries.” (p.182)
There are two solutions for the pacifist at this junction. Firstly,  to prohibit any form of self-preservation that requires harming another,  even if he is an aggressor, in the belief that one s life is less  morally valuable than one s pure death. The criticism is that this rewards  aggression, for “evil will always flourish when good men do nothing” (Edmund  Burke), to which the pacifist may reply that the rewards for moral purity  are not to be found in this life but in the after-life, a reply that is  not attractive to those who do not believe in life after death. The second  solution is to divide humanity into those who may seek and attain moral  purity and those who cannot or should not. This avoids any need to resort  to postmortem tales of heavenly rewards, but then raises a host of political  and ethical questions as to the membership of the pure élite.
 b. The Nature of Violence
The next philosophical problem that pacifism has to deal with is what  is meant by violence. The adjective  violent  applies to many situations  that the nominal pacifist would not necessarily oppose, from its uses to  describe agitated or passionate behavior to morally legitimately violent  actions against the self or another person. For example, the martial and  pugnacious sports involve a violence that the pacifist could accept, although  many would decry such institutions as being part of the culture of violence  that pervades aggressive nations (and hence are deemed potential causal  factors in war) and which ought to be banned or severely limited. Yet the  violence meted out on, say a person s body in surgery is not something  that most pacifists would accept deserving abolition.
Pacifists may also accept that a violent passion or argument is not  something that should be prohibited or morally censured, although there  are thinkers here, say, in the Chinese Confucian philosophy that aspire  to the calmer control of the mind/spirit over the emotions, and any violent  reaction (hysterical laughter, grief, etc.) or reversion to a violent manner  disrupts the inner calm a man should seek, which in turn forms the basis  of a peaceful community. Similarly, those who claim that reason is man s  most important faculty, and that it can and should rule the body and its  conflicting emotions, assert that violent behavior or action against another  is inimical to the life of a rational being and should be avoided absolutely.
 c. The Use of Force
Connected to issues of violence is the use of force against another  person which a pacifist must consider. The use of force (again a complex  area of study in itself) can take many forms including legal restraint  as well as bodily restraint. Effectively both seek to confine the movement  of the individual and pacifists may or may not reject the use of force  in civil society. The use of force need not be violent, or do physical  damage, but does imply some infringement on the free activity of an agent.  The philosophical discussion revolves around the justification of that  infringement, whether, for example, it can be legitimate or justifiable  in any situation. Some, on the anarchist wing, can claim that any use of  force is an abrogation of morality, whereas most pacifists accept the need  to restrain dangerous individuals from harming others. A question that  may be put to such thinkers is why should there be a distinction between  protecting people from dangerous civilians and protecting from dangerous  nations. In other words, the pacifist has to consider the moral nature  of political sovereignty and, if necessary, justify the reason why the  use of force is permitted domestically but not internationally for similar  issues.
Generally, those that oppose the use of force or violence in society  deplore the use of physical means to intervene in another person s behavior,  although some are willing to expand the concept of force or violence to  include emotional abuse, cultural prejudices, mental games that is, forms  of psychological warfare and propaganda designed to undermine the dignity  of the individual.
 d. Innocents
Who is the target of any war, violence, force, or restraint also has  to be considered by the pacifist. Few would admit that a dangerous person  should not be restrained in some form or other, and most pacifists would  accept injuring or even killing a dangerous criminal if the circumstances  admit it, although the argument for retaining a moral purity can be deployed  here, leaving the pacifist to justify permitting aggression to flourish.
In this case, the pacifist has to evaluate the moral nature of the particular  threat against duties towards others and their right to peace. Deontological  pacifists, those who assert that peaceful interaction is a duty to be supported,  must weigh their pacifism against the violation of that peace by criminals  or dangerous persons. Some pacifists here resort to defining innocents  as people deserving their dignity and peace and whose lives ought to be  protected against violent offenders. Violence and the use of force by domestic  authorities may be thus permitted by pacifists, who reject war or interventions  across borders, but they would emphasize that any infringement should be  reasonable and be legitimate and should avoid any unnecessary violence.  Once an interventionist war is morally permitted the pacifist becomes at  least pacificist (see below).
The most intricate difficulty facing the general pacifist is the link  between personal pacifism and international pacifism, which is not very  clear-cut in most writings. Some pacifists, as we have seen, may admit  the use of internal aggression to sustain law and order but be set against  the use of aggression for resolving international disputes. Unlike domestic  issues, they can argue, international affairs is subject to no overriding  supreme authority that can be turned to for conflict resolution, and here  the pacifist would argue that war should never be employed as a means for  resolving disputes between morally or politically equal corporate entities.  However, the question can be raised as to why the use of force is morally  legitimate within a nation s borders (to restrain criminals) but not so  beyond them (to restrain international criminals), especially if the case  involves halting the illegitimate use of aggression by one party against  innocents.
 2. The Ethics of Pacifism
As noted above, pacifist ethics can be described from two main viewpoints.  Firstly, the deontological position which decrees that moral agents have  an absolute duty to avoid aggressing or waging war against others. Secondly,  the consequentialist position which asserts that no good ever comes from  aggressive actions or war and it is thereby prohibited, not because it  is an evil in itself, but because it always leads to a worse off  position for the majority. This section investigates firstly the absolutist  doctrine, then conditional pacifism from both perspectives.
 a. Absolute Pacifism
 ii. Deontological Pacifism
Held as a duty, it is incumbent on the pacifist never to aggress, use  force, or support or engage in war against another. Duties are moral actions  that are required or demanded in all pertinent circumstances.
The first problem for deontological pacifism is the potential collision  of duties. What if force is to be used to halt an aggressor who endangers  the pacifist s life, or the life of an innocent? Regarding the pacifist s  own life, it can be argued that he or she possesses no right of self-defense  (and must “turn the other cheek”), although this is typically the position  of those who place not much value on living this life in favor of  living a life in the realms beyond. Among such adherents are religious  pacifists. Another example: does the duty to respect others outweigh the  duty to respect oneself? The aggressor obviously transcends any duty of  respect he should have towards his victim but does that warrant the forfeiture  of his life? Those pacifists who admit the right to defend the self against  a threat can admit the use of restraining or disabling force and even,  if the threat is deadly, the right to kill an assailant. Deontological  pacifists can claim that others  rights to life are of a higher order duty  than the duty to intervene to save oneself. But that hinges upon a moral  evaluation of the self compared to others, and it is not clear why others  should accord a higher moral evaluation: for after all the self is in turn  one amongst many  others  from a different subject s point of view.
If the pacifist argues that his life is his own to lay down in the face  of aggression (as a moral principle, as a moral example, as an example  of martyrdom, etc), the problem intensifies when the life of another is  threatened, whom the pacifist is in a position to assist, and who, as a  living subject, may prefer life over death.
The pacifist who claims that he has no duty to intervene in saving others  affairs treads a precarious moral path here; the immediate retort is why  should the moral life of the pacifist be morally more important than the  life of the threatened innocent? For the sake of his own beliefs, could  the pacifist consistently ignore the violence meted upon others? Yes, from  two possible perspectives. The first is that the ideal of pacifism retains  a supremacy over all other ideals and is not to be compromised. The second  is that the life of the pacifist is morally superior to the life of the  threatened innocent, even if that innocent happens to be a fellow absolute  pacifist.
Deontologists argue that certain kinds of moral actions are good in  themselves, hence deontological pacifists claim peace to be a duty to be  categorically upheld; however, other moralists argue for pacifism on the  basis of its beneficial consequences rather than any intrinsic notion of  the good these are consequentialist pacifists.
 ii. Consequentialist Pacifism
Pacifism can be supported by moral consequentialists who assert that  the evils procured by violence, force, or war, far outweigh any of the  good that may arise. For example, rule utilitarians claim that if certain  inimical consequences flow from particular actions, a blanket prohibition  on such actions is morally required, which, in terms of the implications  of the argument brings them close to the deontological position of an absolute  prohibition of war, etc.
Rule utilitarianism holds that a behavioral code or rule is morally right if the consequences  of adopting that rule are more favorable than unfavorable to everyone.  Accordingly, rule utilitarian pacifists claim that the avoidance of war  (or violence, or force) should be a moral rule since its abrogation would  be less beneficial to all. For example, if, on balance, all hitherto wars  are perceived as producing effects that none would have wanted prior to  the war, then a rule against war should be adopted. The rule outlaws war  in the particular and in general, even if a particular war could produce  better consequences it should not be accepted on the grounds that it violates  a moral rule, and that moral rule claims more favorable consequences for  entire world if war is absolutely prohibited.
However, absolute consequentialist principles are exceedingly difficult  to sustain, for they are firstly based on a particular reading of history a  reading that can emphasize ruinous results over any good that may ultimately  have arisen. They are empirical judgements on the past and as such open  to not only historical critique but also the logical argument that what  was true yesterday may not be true tomorrow (or at least cannot be proven to be so). That is, while past wars were wholly detrimental to the human  race as a whole, tomorrow s wars, because of new technology or strategy,  or even a new ethic, may not be. Accordingly, the moral rule may in principle  change and therefore cannot be held absolutely.
It is possible, for example, to consider that the Second World War (and  all the untoward deaths and destruction that it brought) ultimately promoted  the greater good of a peaceful Europe and enhanced international co-operation.  It is difficult to empirically sustain that  nothing good ever came from  war , for critics can always point to something good whose value may be  suitably expanded to provide an argument; in which case the argument becomes  a comparison of goods and their respective moral weightings (20 million  deaths versus fifty plus years of European peace for hundreds of millions).
 iii. Absuolute Pacifism Summarized
In summary, the absolute pacifist of both ethical persuasions prohibits  war regardless of particular circumstances. As a doctrine, the onus in  on justifying the pacifist principle against arguments for aggression and  war. What, it may be asked, should be the appropriate response to a person  who believes that violence is a morally appropriate method to gain values?  The absolute pacifist thus has to justify not retaliating or defending  himself or others (innocents or not) in the face of aggression. Often the  recourse is to non-earthly values such as the Kingdom of Heaven, i.e.,  death is morally superior to violent resistance, deterrence, or aggression,  or to a moral division between peoples, between the superior pacifists  and the impure aggressors.
 b. Conditional Pacifism
Against the doctrinal absolute prohibition of the use of violence or  war, conditional pacifism admits its use under certain circumstances. Again,  the analysis can begin with an examination of deontological or consequentialist  positions
 i. Conditional Deontological Pacifism
Conditional pacifism from the deontological perspective admits that  the enactment of duties cannot be considered in isolation, for they may  overlap and hence require a conditional acceptance or a moral weighing.  For the conditional pacifist, the duty to uphold peace and non-violence  may conflict with the duty to save or defend lives against aggression,  if the latter duty is accepted. Therefore, in cases of what Walzer calls   supreme emergencies  (Just and Unjust Wars), the duty to peace  may be trumped by alternative ethical requirements.
To take an example from political theory that is an appropriate area  of discussion here: a common defense of the use of violence or war is that  it is a justifiable or legitimate procedure to defend rights, and rights  theories are often supported from a conditional deontological position.  The pacifist counters that the argument to violate rights to protect rights  is incoherent, for the use of force inherently violates the rights it is  supposed to defend or protect. The alleged paradox is resolved, it can  be argued, by asserting that rights are things to be upheld and defended,  firstly as negative claims requiring an absence of violation, and secondly  as positive claims that require freedom to pursue goals. An aggressor violates  both elements. A right cannot be a value unless it is defensible, but it  does not mean that the rights of aggressors are infringed in defending  one s rights, for, as Lockean theorists argue, aggressors lose rights in  attacking others. Pacifists can disagree with this and argue that if rights  theory is to be coherent, rights ought to be inviolable and inalienable.  Hence if they are contingently held they cannot be deemed  inviolable rights  but conditional  privileges , which may accordingly be removed if someone  abuses their own rights entitlements by violating those of others.
 ii. Conditional Utilitarian Pacifism
For the consequentialist, all moral guides are conditional on the circumstances  and protracted outcomes of an action. In the case of conditional pacifism,  a utilitarian ascribes to  act utilitarianism  in which each particular  act, war, battle, etc., is examined from the moral perspective of what  outcome is likely to produce more favorable results. Accordingly, whilst  the pacifist may claim that wars generally do not produce more favorable  results, in specific examples they can be acceptable. Such examples may  include wars of self-defense, or wars of intervention to protect a people  from genocidal campaigns. But the further removed the pacifist gets from  the peaceful ideal, the more he or she moves into the just war realm, or  the theory called  pacificism .
 c. Pacificism
Pacificism, defined by Martin Caedel (Thinking about War and Peace,  1987), is a useful term to describe those who prefer peaceful conditions  to war but who accept that some wars may be necessary if they advance the  cause of peace. In a sense this is a further step away from conditional  pacifism which rules out war or the use of force except in very exceptional  circumstances. In this case, the political achievements that have generated  peace may be defended militarily if necessary for the overriding goal of  global peace.
Following Richard Norman (Ethics, Killing, and War, 1995), pacificism  falls between pacifism and defencism, where defencism is the theory that  accepts all defensive wars and acts of deterrence as just (but which rules  out aggressive wars). It implies an interesting justification of war for  peace s sake that is not essential to defencism but which also steps beyond  the sometimes non-worldly or unrealistic vision of pacifism. Pacificism  can reject a defensive war if it undermines the overall concord that may  be latent in the international (or national in the case of civil war) situation.  This reaches into some intriguing territory, for its remit is vague but  also flexible.
On the vague side, pacificism falls back onto similar problems that  general consequentialism faces, namely the inability to propose a rule  or guiding principle that is not affected by either new events or alternative  interpretations of the same event. This, like general consequentialism,  provides the theory with flexibility, but where this does become an issue  is in the logical extension of the theory to proclaim the war to end all  wars as a pacificistic ideal, which logically it does entail.
A defensive war, justified on the traditional grounds of just war theory,  may be rejected as causing greater overall international instability, but  on the other hand it does not thoroughly rule out an aggressive war of  intervention or of imperialism to impose peace, although most pacificists  would say that it does, on the grounds that all aggressive wars should  be ruled out. But why? If two neighboring nations are about to wage a war  that will create greater global instability and the chance is there to  contain the momentum with an aggressive policing action, then so long as  peace is the ultimate goal, the means become morally acceptable.
Pacificism can be acceptable to many shades of opinion. Very few thinkers  assert that war should be waged for its own sake, which poses logical problems  of its own for often war is to be waged for glory or for valor or for land  or for values. But most thinkers will argue that peace is the most favorable  condition for man within which to reside: peace enables enterprise, families,  and life in general to flourish. Accordingly, such thinkers will accept  that to secure peaceful conditions, war may have to be waged, but that  it can only be waged for the sake of peace. We read this in Plato,  Aristotle, and the host of philosophers and jurists that they influenced.  But if peace is the overriding goal, the means to secure peace can really  include anything.
For example, one of the longest recorded reigns of human peace lasted  in Egypt between 5000 and 2000 BC, partly as a result of geographical isolation  and partly as a result of the strict and unchanging social system that  prevailed; the imposition of central control may enforce a long term peace,  but it is not a means that all may be willing to accept. A strong central  state, as Plato argues for in The Republic, could impose peace by  permitting no change or allowing any conditions conducive to change. But,  arguably, such an environment leads to the stultification of the mind,  and if the individual mind is not free to challenge the present order,  to disrupt or create, then society is not in a position to  adapt, which ultimately does not augur well for any society once change  comes from outsiders or changes in the environment for example.
Imperialism often imposes an international peace that few today would  accept, but if peace is secured why should the nature of the political  institution be rejected if it works? The Romans provided the pax romana and the British attempted a similar pax britannica, that secured  peace amongst hitherto belligerent and restless tribes. Most present thinkers  reject imperialism yet some such as Michael Ignatieff do wonder whether  its benefits may outweigh the costs (The Warrior s Honor). Empirically,  it can be claimed that imperialism is globally more stable and peaceful  than tribalism and its larger brother, nationalism, both of which have  generated a great portion of the world s wars.
On the other hand, a federation of states, as considered by the Abbé  Saint-Pierre in his Perpetual Peace and Immanuel Kant in his more  famous work of the same name, proposes that while peace is the ultimate  end to be secured, a federation of equal states is the appropriate political  vehicle.
Kant argues that peoples will be drawn closer together through commercial  ties and nature will prompt them to follow the dictates of reason that  encourage the more beneficial peaceful enterprises over mutual animosity.  Kant suggests that the process towards perpetual peace the pacifistic goal is  inevitable, given the manner in which people deal with one another. Yet  the optimism of the Age of Enlightenment was soon demolished by counter-acting  principles of thought and politics that emphasized the glories of nationalism,  of isolationism, and implicitly or explicitly, the benefits that war can  bring.
Peaceful intercourse is easily rejected by those who assert the benefits  of the martial values, who claim that a war brings out the best of people  and of a society, that wars heighten humanity s perception of itself in  the great existentialist quest between life and death, that war relieves  the monotony of consumerism and so on.
This highlights one of the most difficult aspects of pacificism, that  the goal of peace and of tranquillity may not suffice human nature. The  persistent nagging of bellicosity, of adventure, personal and collective  glory, whether it derives from something genetic or culturally deeply embedded  in most societies, remains an easily revitalized clarion call to war. The  culture of peace is often very shallow, taking many generations to produce,  and even then can be swiftly eroded with atavistic rhetoric. Often what  secures the maintenance of peace are the rule of law and the expansion  of commercial ties, as Kant foresaw. But these achievements require, in  the case of the rule of law, a determined political acceptance of the law  and its impartial application, and in the case of commercial ties, a sphere  of individual freedom that permits the growth of mutually beneficial ties  that most philosophers who look at the world in terms of what needs to  be controlled are unable to accept. The crumbling of the rule of law undermines  the potential for any society to exist peacefully, but so too does constant  intervention in market processes which connects to the need for the rule  of law.
Commercial pacificists, those who see in the expansion of the market  order the foundations of future peace, point to the nature of domestic  peace as the blueprint for international peace. In the past a war between  two English counties was quite an acceptable event (The Wars of the Roses  between the houses representing Yorkshire and Lancashire) but today a similar  proclamation of war would be absurd. In more recent history, the US was  torn in two by the States fighting the Civil War, yet war between them  today could not be seriously entertained. What has brought peace to these  one-time enemies needs to be understood if peace is to be secured between  larger or more independent political units.
The optimism of commercial pacificists is criticized on two grounds.  Firstly, it may take a longer time to secure peace than the present generation  is willing to permit, and secondly, the beneficial processes of market  trading and the rule of law may not be acceptable to the target nation  or people. In both cases an imposed order of peace may be preferred on  consequentialist reasons, that less harm is done in the long run by enforcing  a peace today. However, it can be reasonably countered that the imposition  of peace on cultures not prepared to shed centuries of belligerence will  not secure peace in the long run; various thinkers here, most notably John  Stuart Mill, argue that societies must find their own ways to peace (freedom,  self-determination) otherwise they will not appreciate them.
 3. Conclusion
The article has provided a very general overview of some of the forms pacifism  can take, as well as some of the issues it invokes. The area is philosophically  broad and intricate, which the expanse of relevant literature reflects.  The ethical positions described in the essay divide between deontological  and consequentialist positions, but virtue theory is also highly applicable:  what kind of person are you if you wield force or if you do turn the other  cheek? Is a peaceful life more or less virtuous compared to a life of violence,  and on what grounds? I have touched on the religious moral dimension of  pacifism, which typically holds that secular life is of a lower value than  the protracted life after death, but justice cannot be done to the variety  of theological systems and nuances that produce such an ethic. Justifying  pacifism from purely secular premises is a much harder task for any thinker  who cannot have recourse to rewards in heaven and it is a challenge that  is worth exploring for its own sake by any philosopher interested in war  or peace.
Author Information
Alexander Moseley
Email: alexandermoseley@icloud.com
United Kingdom





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







