








Evolutionary Psychology | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Evolutionary Psychology
In its broad sense, the  term “evolutionary psychology” stands for any attempt to adopt an evolutionary perspective on human behavior by supplementing psychology with the central  tenets of evolutionary biology. The underlying idea is that since our mind is  the way it is at least in part because of our evolutionary past, evolutionary  theory can aid our understanding not only of the human body, but also of the  human mind. In this broad sense, evolutionary psychology is a general field of  inquiry that includes such diverse approaches as human behavioral ecology, memetics,  dual-inheritance theory, and Evolutionary Psychology in the narrow sense.
The latter is a narrowly circumscribed adaptationist research  program which regards the human mind as an integrated collection of cognitive  mechanisms that guide our behavior and form our universal human nature. These  cognitive mechanisms are supposed to be adaptations—the result of evolution by  natural selection, that is, heritable variation in fitness. Adaptations are  traits present today because in the past they helped our ancestors to solve  recurrent adaptive problems. In particular, Evolutionary Psychology is  interested in those adaptations that have evolved in response to characteristically  human adaptive problems that have shaped our ancestors’ lifestyle as  hunter-gatherers during our evolutionary past in the Pleistocence, like  choosing and securing a mate, recognizing emotional expressions, acquiring a  language, distinguishing kin from non-kin, detecting cheaters or remembering  the location of edible plants. The purpose of Evolutionary Psychology is to  discover and explain these cognitive mechanisms that guide current human behavior  because they have been selected for as solutions to the recurrent adaptive  problems prevalent in the evolutionary environment of our ancestors.
Evolutionary Psychology  thus rests on a couple of key arguments and ideas: (1) The claim that the cognitive  mechanisms that are underlying our behavior are adaptations. (2) The idea that they  cannot be studied directly, for example, through observation of the brain or our  overt behavior, but have to be discovered by means of a method known as “functional  analysis,” where one starts with hypotheses about the adaptive problems faced  by our ancestors, and then tries to infer the cognitive adaptations that must  have evolved to solve them. (3) The claim that these cognitive mechanisms are  adaptations not for solving problems prevalent in our modern environment, but for  solving recurrent adaptive problems in the evolutionary environment of our  ancestors. (4) The idea that our mind is a complex set of such cognitive mechanisms,  or domain-specific modules. (5) The claim that these modules define who we are,  in the sense that they define our universal human nature and ultimately trump any  individual, cultural or societal differences.
Table of Contents

Historic and Systematic Roots

The Computational Model of the Mind
The Modularity of Mind
Adaptationism


Key Concepts and Arguments

Adaptation and Adaptivity
Functional Analysis
The Environment of Evolutionary Adaptedness
Domain-specificity and Modularity
Human Nature


Examples of Empirical Research
Problems and Objections

Genetic Determinism
Moral and Societal Issues
Untestability and Story Telling
Psychological Inadequacy


Evolutionary Approaches to Mind, Culture, and Behavior: Alternatives to Evolutionary Psychology

Human Behavioral Ecology
Memetics
Gene-Culture Coevolution


References and Further Reading

Suggested Further Reading
Other Referenced Works



 1. Historic and Systematic Roots
Modern Evolutionary  Psychology has its roots in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when psychologist  Leda Cosmides and anthropologist John Tooby from Harvard joined the  anthropologist Donald Symons at The University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) where they currently co-direct the Center for Evolutionary Psychology.  It gained wide attention in 1992 with the publication of the landmark volume The Adapted Mind by Jerome Barkow, Leda  Cosmides and John Tooby, and since then numerous textbooks (for example, Buss  1999) and popular presentations (for example, Pinker 1997, 2002; Wright 1994)  have appeared. These days, Evolutionary Psychology is a powerful research  program that has generated some interesting research, but it has also sparked a  heated debate about its aspirations and limitations (see, for example, Rose and  Rose 2000).
Evolutionary Psychology  is effectively a theory about How the  Mind Works (Pinker 1997). The human mind is not an all-purpose problem solver relying on a limited number of  general principles that are universally applied to all problems—a view that  dominated early artificial intelligence (AI) and  behaviorism (for example, Skinner 1938, 1957). (For the idea of an all-purpose problem solver see, for  example, Newell and Simon 1972; for some of the earliest AI work related to this  idea see, for example, Newell and Simon 1961, Newell et al. 1958.) Rather, the human mind is a collection of  independent, task-specific cognitive mechanisms, a collection of instincts adapted  for solving evolutionary significant problems. The human mind is sort of a  Swiss Army knife (Pinker 1994). This conception of the mind is based on three  important ideas adopted from other disciplines (Cosmides and Tooby 2003, 54;  Samuels 1998, 577): the computational  model of the mind, the assumption of modularity,  and the thesis of adaptationism.
 a. The Computational Model of the Mind
Following the  development of modern logic (Boole 1847; Frege 1879) and the formalization of  the notion of computation (Turing 1936), early AI construed logical operations  as mechanically executable information processing routines. Eventually, this  led to the idea that mental processes (for example, reasoning) and mental  states (for example, beliefs and desires) may themselves also be analyzable in  purely syntactic terms. The “Computational Theory of Mind,” developed by  philosophers like Hilary Putnam (1963) and Jerry Fodor (1975, 1981), for instance, conceives  of mental states as relations between a thinker and symbolic representations of  the content of the states, and of mental processes as formal operations on the  syntactic features of those representations.
Evolutionary Psychology  endorses the computational model of the mind as an information processing  system or a formal symbol manipulator and thus treats the mind as a collection  of “computational machines” (Cosmides and Tooby 2003, 54) or  “information-processing mechanisms” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990a, 21) that receive  input from the environment and produce behavior or physiological changes as  output. To this, it adds an evolutionary perspective: “The evolutionary function of the human brain is to process information  in ways that lead to adaptive behavior; the mind is a description of the  operation of a brain that maps informational input onto behavioral output”  (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 282). The brain is thus not just like a computer. “It is a  computer—that is, a physical system that was designed to process information”  (Tooby and Cosmides 2005, 16; italics added).
The Computational Model of the Mind: The human mind is an information processing system, physically  realized in the brain, and can be described at a computational level as a  device whose evolutionary function is to process information by mapping  informational input onto behavioral output.
 b. The Modularity of Mind
Early attempts at  simulating human intelligence revealed that artificial cognitive systems that  are not already equipped with a fair amount of “innate knowledge” about a  particular problem domain are unable to solve even the easiest problems (see, for  example, the idea of “scripts” in Schank and Abelson 1977). In the 1970s and  1980s, the work of scientists like Noam Chomsky, Jerry Fodor, or David Marr further  undermined the idea of the mind as a “blank slate” which acquires knowledge  about the world by means of only a couple of general learning mechanisms. Their  findings suggested instead that the mind incorporates a number of cognitive  subsystems that are triggered only by a certain kind of input. While Marr (1982)  was working on the neuroscience of vision, Chomsky famously criticized the behaviorist  idea that language acquisition is just an ordinary kind of learning that follows  the stimulus-response model by proving the intractability of some learning  algorithms (see, for example, his 1959 review of Skinner’s Verbal Behavior or Chomsky 1957; for a later statement of similar ideas  see Chomsky 1975). According to his “Poverty of the Stimulus” argument, a child  cannot learn her first language through observation because the available  stimuli (that is, the utterances of adult speakers) neither enable her to  produce grammatically correct nor prevent her from producing grammatically  incorrect sentences. Instead, Chomsky argued, we possess a “language  acquisition device” which, rather than extracting all information from the  world through some general mechanism, comes already equipped with a certain  amount of “innate knowledge.” Just as our body contains a number of innate,  genetically predisposed organs that serve a specific function, our mind also  contains a number of information processing systems (like the language  acquisition device), so called  mental organs or modules in Fodor’s (1983) terminology, that are designed to perform  a particular cognitive function.
The model of the mind  as a general learning mechanism that is indiscriminately applied to any problem  domain was also disconfirmed in other areas of cognitive science. Garcia and  Koelling (1966) showed that while rats can learn some associations by means of stimulus-response  mechanisms, others, albeit structurally similar, cannot be learned at all, or  only much slower: rats that are given food that makes them nauseous  subsequently avoid that kind of food, but they are unable to learn an  association between a sound or a light and feeling nauseous. Galef (1990) demonstrated  that rats readily eat a new kind of food if they smell it at another rat’s mouth,  but not if they smell it at another part of the body. Mineka and Cook (1988) showed  that a laboratory raised monkey that initially did not show fear of snakes  started to do so once he observed another monkey exhibiting fear of snakes; yet,  he didn’t start to show fear of flowers when observing the other doing so. Comparable  “learning biases” have been found for humans in various areas (for example,  Cook et al. 1986; Marks and  Nesse 1994; Seligman and Hagar 1972).
Evolutionary  Psychologists conclude that the assumption that the human mind is composed  mainly of a few content-free cognitive processes that are “thought to govern  how one acquires a language and a gender identity, an aversion to incest and an  appreciation for vistas, a desire for friends and a fear of spiders—indeed,  nearly every thought and feeling of which humans are capable” (Ermer et al. 2007, 155) is inadequate. Such  mechanisms would be “limited to knowing what can be validly derived by general  processes from perceptual information” (Cosmides and Tooby 1994, 92) and thus  incapable of efficiently solving adaptive problems (see section 2d). Instead, Evolutionary  Psychologists claim, “our cognitive architecture resembles a confederation of  hundreds or thousands of functionally dedicated computers” (Tooby and Cosmides  1995, xiii), the so-called “modules”:
Modularity: The mind  consists of a (possibly large) number of domain-specific, innately specified  cognitive subsystems, called “modules.”
 c. Adaptationism
Since cognitive  mechanisms are not directly observable, studying them requires some indirect  way of discovering them (see section 2b). Evolutionary Psychologists adopt the  kind of adaptationist reasoning well known from evolutionary biology that also  characterizes many works in sociobiology (Wilson  1975). Ever since Charles Darwin (1859/1964) proposed his theory of evolution  by natural selection, evolutionary biologists quite successfully offer adaptationist explanations of  physiological features of living things that explain the presence of a trait by  claiming that it is an adaptation, that is, a trait current organisms possess  because it enhanced their ancestors’ fitness. During the 1970s, sociobiologists  argued that “social behaviors [too] are shaped by natural selection” (Lumsden  and Wilson 1981, 99; for the original manifesto of sociobiology see Wilson 1975)  and started to seek adaptationist explanations for cognitive, cultural, and  social traits, like the ability to behave altruistically, different mating  preferences in males and females, or the frequently observed parent-offspring conflicts.
Evolutionary  Psychologists have inherited sociobiology’s adaptationist program: “The core  idea … is that many psychological characteristics are adaptations—just as many  physical characteristics are—and that the principles of evolutionary biology  that are used to explain our bodies are equally applicable to our minds”  (Durrant and Ellis 2003, 5). Our mind, they argue, is a complex, functionally  integrated collection of cognitive mechanisms, and since the only known natural  process that can bring about such functional complexity is evolution by natural  selection (Cosmides and Tooby 1991, 493; Symons 1987, 126; Tooby and Cosmides  1990b, 382), these cognitive mechanisms are likely to be adaptations to the  adaptive problems of our ancestors. This, Evolutionary Psychologists hold, intimately  links psychology with evolutionary theory: “Because the architecture of the  human mind acquired its functional organization through the evolutionary  process, theories of adaptive function are the logical foundation on which to  build theories of the design of cognitive mechanisms” (Ermer et al. 2007, 153–4). While evolutionary  theory is used to describe the relevant ancestral problems and to make educated  guesses about the information processing cognitive mechanisms that have been  shaped by natural selection in response, the task of psychology is to establish  that current humans actually possess these mechanisms (see section 2b).
Adaptationism: The  human mind, like any other complex feature, was shaped by a process of evolution  through natural selection. Its subsystems, the modules, are adaptations for  solving recurrent information processing problems that arose in our ancestors’  evolutionary environment.
 2. Key Concepts and Arguments
According to Evolutionary Psychology, the human mind is a set of cognitive adaptations designed by natural selection. Since such design takes time, the adaptive problems that shaped our mind are not the ones we know from our life as industrialists during the past 200 years, or from our life as agriculturalists during the past 10,000 years, but those characteristic of our past life as hunter-gatherers. Since these problems varied considerably, the human mind contains many problem-specific adaptations. The task of Evolutionary Psychology is to discover these modules by means of what is called a “functional analysis,” where one starts with hypotheses about the adaptive problems faced by our ancestors, and then tries to infer the cognitive adaptations that must have evolved to solve them.
This theoretical framework of Evolutionary Psychology centers on a couple of key ideas which will be explained in this section: (1) The cognitive mechanisms that underlie our behavior are adaptations. (2) They have to be discovered by means of functional analysis. (3) They are adaptations for solving recurrent adaptive problems in the evolutionary environment of our ancestors. (4) Our mind is a complex set of such mechanisms, or domain-specific modules. (5) These modules define our universal human nature.
 a. Adaptation and Adaptivity
That our evolutionary  history influenced not only our bodies, but also our brains, and thus our  minds, is not very controversial. But how exactly has evolution affected the  way we are, mind-wise? How exactly can evolutionary theory elucidate the structure  and function of the human mind?
It may seem that “behavioral  traits are like any other class of characters” (Futuyama 1998, 579), so that they  can be subject to natural selection in the same way as physiological traits. In  that case, an evolutionary study of human behavior could then proceed by studying  behavioral variants and see which of them are adaptive and which selectively  neutral or detrimental. However, since natural selection is heritable variation in fitness, it can  act only on entities that are transmitted between generations, and behavior as  such is not directly transmitted between generations, but only via the genes that code for the proximal  cognitive mechanisms that trigger it. Hence, “[t]o speak of natural selection  as selecting for ‘behaviors’ is a convenient shorthand, but it is misleading  usage. … Natural selection cannot select for behavior per se; it can only  select for mechanisms that produce behavior” (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 281).
Hence, an evolutionary  approach to human psychology must proceed by studying the cognitive mechanisms that  underlie our behavior: “In the rush to apply evolutionary insights to a science  of human behavior, many researchers have made a conceptual ‘wrong turn,’ … [which]  has consisted of attempting to apply evolutionary theory directly to the level  of manifest behavior, rather than using it as a heuristic guide for the  discovery of innate psychological mechanisms” (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 278–9).  By sharply distinguishing between adaptive behavior and the cognitive mechanisms  that are adaptations for producing adaptive behavior, Evolutionary Psychologists  provide “the missing link between evolutionary theory and manifest behavior”  (Tooby and Cosmides 1989, 37). [The drawback is that things become more  complicated since “it is less easy to sustain claims that a trait is a product  of natural selection than claims that it confers reproductive benefits on  individuals in contemporary populations” (Caro and Borgerhoff Mulder 1987, 66).  Section 2b shows how Evolutionary Psychologists try to cope with this difficulty,  and section 5a discusses a version of evolutionary psychology that focuses on  adaptive behavior.]
We quite often do  things detrimental to survival and reproduction (we use contraceptives, consume  unhealthy doses of fatty food, and blow ourselves up in the middle of crowded  market places). We also willfully refrain from doing things that would be conducive  to survival (buy some healthy food, exercise) or boost our potential for reproduction  (donate our sperm or eggs to cryobanks). If Evolutionary Psychology is right  that our mind contains cognitive mechanisms that are adaptations for producing  adaptive behavior, then why are we behaving maladaptively so often?
The claim that the  brain is an adaptation for producing adaptive behavior does not entail that it is currently producing adaptive  behavior. Adaptations are traits that are present today because of the  selective advantage they offered in the  past, and the past environment arguably differed notably from the current one.  The modern metropolis in which we live in unprecedented large groups, consume fast  food and use contraceptives is not even 100 years old, and even agriculture  arose only some 10,000 years ago. Compared to this, our ancestors spent an  unimaginably long time in Pleistocene conditions (roughly, the period spanning 1.8 million years ago to 10,000 years ago) living  in small nomadic hunter-gatherer bands. The cognitive mechanisms produced by natural  selection are adaptations for producing adaptive behavior in these circumstances, not for playing  chess, passing logic exams, navigating through lower Manhattan, or keeping ideal weight in an  environment full of fast food restaurants. [Which is why we are so bad at these  things: “it is highly unlikely that the cognitive architecture of the human  mind includes procedures that are dedicated to solving any of these problems: The ability to solve them would not have  enhanced the survival or reproduction of the average Pleistocene  hunter-gatherer” and hence “the performance of modern humans on such tasks is  generally poor and uneven” (Cosmides and Tooby 1994, 95).]
Among the day-to-day  problems of our ancestors that shaped the human mind are: “giving birth,  winning social support from band members, remembering the locations of edible  plants, hitting game animals with projectiles, …, recognizing emotional  expressions, protecting family members, maintaining mating relationships, …, assessing  the character of self and others, causing impregnation, acquiring language,  maintaining friendships, thwarting antagonists, and so on” (Cosmides and Tooby  2003, 59). In these areas, we still behave the way we do because our behavior  is guided by cognitive mechanisms that have been selected for because they  produced behavior that was adaptive in our ancestors’ evolutionary environment.  As Evolutionary Psychologists colorfully put it: “Our modern skulls house a  Stone Age mind” (Cosmides and Tooby 1997, 85).
It is thus crucial to  distinguish between a trait’s being an adaptation and its being adaptive. A trait is an  adaptation if it was “designed” by natural selection to solve the specific  problems posed by the regularities of the physical, chemical, ecological,  informational, and social environments encountered by the ancestors of a  species during the course of its evolution” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990b, 383), while  a trait is adaptive if it currently enhances its bearer’s fitness. Since the  environment in which a trait was selected for may differ from the current one, “[t]he  hypothesis that a trait is an adaptation does not imply that the trait is  currently adaptive” (Symons 1990, 430). But if cognitive adaptations can  neither be discovered in the brain, nor by observing current human behavior, how  can they be studied?
 b. Functional Analysis
Verifying the claim  that a trait is an adaptation is difficult because this is essentially a historical  claim. A trait is an adaptation because it was adaptive in the past, and it is unclear what the past was like, let alone what  would have been adaptive under past conditions. According to Evolutionary  Psychology, however, it is possible to verify adaptationist claims:
Researchers can identify  an aspect of an organism’s physical, developmental, or psychological structure  … as an adaptation by showing that (1) it has many design features that are  improbably well suited to solving an ancestral adaptive problem, (2) these  phenotypic properties are unlikely to have arisen by chance alone, and (3) they  are not better explained as the by-product of mechanisms designed to solve some  alternative adaptive problem or some more inclusive class of adaptive problem.  Finding that a reliably developing feature of the species’ architecture solves  an adaptive problem with reliability, precision, efficiency, and economy is  prima facie evidence that an adaptation has been located. (Tooby and Cosmides  2005, 28)
What Tooby and Cosmides  suggest is a procedure known as functional  analysis. One uses evolutionary reasoning to identify the adaptive problems  our ancestors presumably awaited in their evolutionary environment, infers from  this the cognitive mechanisms that one thinks must have evolved to solve these  problems, conducts psychological experiments to show that they are actually  found in current human beings, and rules out alternative explanations.
A bit more precisely, identifying  adaptations by means of functional analysis proceeds in six steps (Tooby and  Cosmides 1989, 40–1):
Step 1 uses evolutionary  considerations to formulate a model of the past adaptive problems the human  mind had to solve.
Step 2 generates  hypotheses about exactly how these problems would have manifested themselves under  the selection pressures present in the evolutionary environment of our  ancestors.
Step 3 formulates a  “computational theory” that specifies “a catalog of the specific information  processing problems” (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 289) that had to be solved to  overcome the adaptive problems identified in step 2.
Step 4 uses the  computational theory “as a heuristic for generating testable hypotheses about  the structure of the cognitive programs that solve the adaptive problems in  question” (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 302).
Step 5 rules out  alternative accounts of the cognitive mechanisms in question that do not treat  them as the result of evolution by natural selection.
Step 6 tests the adaptationist  hypotheses by checking whether modern Homo  sapiens indeed possess the cognitive mechanisms postulated in step 4. If this  test is successful, Evolutionary Psychologists contend, it is quite likely that  the cognitive mechanisms are indeed adaptations for solving the problems  identified in step 1. (For examples of empirical research that, by and large,  follow this theoretical framework, see section 3.)
(One may add a seventh  step which tries to discover the neural basis of the cognitive mechanisms, so  that eventually theories of adaptive problems guide the search for the  cognitive mechanisms that solve them, while knowing what cognitive mechanisms exist  in turn guides the search for their neural basis.)
The  procedure of functional analysis shows what sort of evidence would support the  claim that a cognitive mechanism is an adaptation for solving a given adaptive  problem. However, since functional analysis itself relies on hypotheses about the  adaptive problems prevalent in our ancestors’ past, the obvious question is: How  can we today know with any certainty which adaptive problems our ancestors faced?
 c. The Environment of Evolutionary Adaptedness
Since the “description  of ancestral conditions is one indispensable aspect of characterizing an  adaptation” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990b, 387), discovering the mind’s modules requires  knowing what exactly the environment that Bowlby (1969) calls the environment of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA) looked like. The human  EEA consists in the set of environmental conditions encountered by human  populations during the Pleistocene (from 1.8 million years ago to 10,000 years  ago), when early hominids lived on the savannahs of eastern Africa  as hunter-gatherers. Yet, the EEA “is not a place or a habitat, or even a time  period. Rather, it is a statistical composite of the adaptation-relevant  properties of the ancestral environments encountered by members of ancestral  populations, weighted by their frequency and fitness consequences” (Tooby and  Cosmides 1990b, 386–7). More specifically, it is a “composite of environmental  properties of the most recent segment of a species’ evolution that encompasses  the period during which its modern collection of adaptations assumed their  present form” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990b, 388). Importantly, “different  adaptations will have different EEAs. Some, like language, are firmly anchored  in approximately the last two million years; others, such as infant attachment,  reflect a much lengthier evolutionary history” (Durrant and Ellis 2003, 10). Speaking  about the EEA is thus at least  misleading, since strictly speaking one has to distinguish between the EEA of a  species and the EEA of particular cognitive adaptations.
There are two crucial  questions with regard to the EEA: First, why suppose that our cognitive mechanisms,  even if they are adaptations, are adaptations to exactly the problems faced by  our ancestors in the EEA? Second, how can we today determine the EEA of a  particular adaptation in enough detail?
Evolutionary Psychologists  offer two related arguments in response to the first question. The first draws  attention to the large amount of time our ancestors spent in Pleistocene  conditions compared to the brief stretch of time that has passed since the  advent of agriculture or industrialization: “Our species spent over 99% of its  evolutionary history as hunter-gatherers in Pleistocene environments. Human  psychological mechanisms should be adapted to those environments, not  necessarily to the twentieth-century industrialized world” (Cosmides and Tooby  1987, 280). The second argument maintains that since natural selection is a  slow process, there just have not been enough generations for it to design new cognitive  mechanisms that are well-adapted to our post-agricultural industrial life: “It  is no more plausible to believe that whole new mental organs could evolve since  the Pleistocene … than it is to believe that whole new physical organs such as  eyes would evolve over brief spans. … [and] major and intricate changes in innately  specified information-processing procedures present in human psychological  mechanisms do not seem likely to have taken place over brief spans of  historical time” (Tooby and Cosmides 1989, 34).
Both arguments seem to suffer  from the same difficulty. The 10,000 years that have passed since the Pleistocene  correspond to roughly 400 generations, and if the selection pressure and the  heritability (roughly, a measure of the response to selection) are high enough,  quite a lot can happen in 400 generations. In particular, no one needs to hold that  “whole new mental organs could evolve since the Pleistocene.” In order to  undermine the claim that we are walking fossils with Stone Age minds in our  heads, it is sufficient to show that significant  changes can occur within 400 generations. The same observation threatens the  first argument: How much time our ancestors spent in one environment as  compared to another is completely irrelevant, if the selection pressures in one  differ radically from those in the other.
In response to the second  question, Evolutionary Psychologists point out that, first, we can be  relatively sure that the physical conditions were comparable to the ones today—”an  enormous number of factors, from the properties of light to chemical laws to  the existence of parasites, have stably endured” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990b,  390)—and, second, we can be relatively certain on paleontological grounds that a  great deal of our ancestors spend a great deal of their time on African  savannahs as hunter-gatherers. Yet, since it is in response to the social  problems faced by our ancestors that our cognitive adaptations are said to have  evolved, what matters is not so much the physical environment (which may have  stayed constant, by and large) but the social environment, and the question is  what we can know with any certainty about the social life of our ancestors,  given that social traits do not fossilize.
Evolutionary  Psychologists contend that with regard to the social environment little has  changed, too: our ancestors arguably had to attract and retain mates, provide  care for their children, understand the intentions and emotions of those with  whom they engaged in social exchange, and so forth, just as we do. However, such  general knowledge about the EEA seems to be of little use, for discovering cognitive  adaptations requires formulating a computational theory that provides “a  catalog of the specific information  processing problems” (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 289; italics added), and that goes  significantly beyond being told that our ancestors had to find mates, care for  children, find food and so forth (for more on this see section 4c).
 d. Domain-specificity and Modularity
Empiricism in  philosophy, behaviorism in psychology and the rules and representation approach  to artificial cognitive systems characteristic of GOFAI (“good old fashioned artificial  intelligence”), roughly speaking, shared the belief that our mind contains only  a few domain-general cognitive mechanisms that account for everything we can  learn, be it speaking and understanding a language, solving algebra equations,  playing chess or driving a bike. In contrast, Evolutionary Psychologists insist  that “[f]rom an evolutionary perspective, the human cognitive architecture is  far more likely to resemble a confederation of hundreds or thousands of  functionally dedicated computers … than it is to resemble a single general  purpose computer equipped with a small number of domain-general procedures”  (Tooby and Cosmides 2000, 1171).
Evolutionary  Psychologists have advanced three arguments for this modularity, or massive  modularity, hypothesis. In short, a domain-general  psychological architecture cannot guide behavior in ways that promote fitness  for at least three related reasons:

 What counts as fit behavior differs from domain to domain, so there is no  domain-general criterion of success or failure that correlates with fitness.
 Adaptive courses of action can be neither deduced nor learned by general  criteria, because they depend on statistical relationships between features of  the environment, behavior, and fitness that emerge over many generations and  are, therefore, not observable during a single lifetime.
 Combinatorial explosion paralyzes any truly domain-general system when  encountering real-world complexity. (Cosmides and Tooby 1994, 91)

Simply put, the idea  behind the first argument is that “[t]here is no such thing as a ‘general  problem solver’ because there is no such thing as a general problem” (Symons  1992, 142). Our ancestors faced a host of different adaptive problems, and  “different adaptive problems frequently have different optimal solutions”  (Cosmides and Tooby 1991, 500): what counts as a successful solution to one,  say choosing a mate, arguably differs from what counts as a successful solution  to another, say choosing nutritious food. Hence, there is no domain-general  criterion of success or failure: “A woman who used the same taste preference  mechanisms in choosing a mate that she used to choose nutritious foods would  choose a very strange mate indeed, and such a design would rapidly select  itself out” (Cosmides and Tooby 1994, 90). Hence, because different solutions  can be implemented only by different, functionally distinct mechanisms, there  must be as many domain-specific subsystems as there are domains in which the  definitions of successful behavior differ. “The human mind … is composed of  many different programs for the same reason that a carpenter’s toolbox contains  many different tools: Different problems require different solutions” (Tooby  and Cosmides 2000, 1168). In response to this argument, the critics have pointed  out that there is no reason why a cognitive system that relies on a few domain-general  mechanisms that are fed with innate domain-specific information should not be as  good as a modular cognitive architecture (see, for example, Samuels 1998, 587).
According to the second  argument, a domain general decision rule such as “Do that which maximizes your  inclusive fitness” cannot efficiently guide behavior because whether or not a  behavior is fitness enhancing is something an individual often cannot find out  within its own lifetime, given that the fitness impact of a design feature  relative to alternative designs “is inherently unobservable at the time the  design alternative actually impacts the world, and therefore cannot function as  a cue for a decision rule” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990b, 417). As Buss has put it:  “the relevant fitness information only becomes known generations later and  hence is not accessible to individual actors” (Buss 1995, 10). For instance, whether  one should prefer fatty food over vegetables, or whether one should decide to  have children with potential partner A or with rival B are behavioral decisions  whose impact on one’s fitness clearly cannot be learned empirically at the time  these decisions have to be made. While in the former case, it may help to have  a look at what others are doing, that strategy is of no avail in the latter  case. And even in the former case the appeal to the possibility of learning from  others only pushes the problem one step further because “[i]mitation is useless  unless those imitated have themselves solved the problem of the adaptive  regulation of behavior” (Cosmides and Tooby 1987, 295).
As Ermer et al. (2007) have put the point, the  problem for domain-general cognitive architectures is that we are living in “clueless  environments”:
Content-free architectures  are limited to knowing what can be validly derived by general processes from  perceptual information available during an individual’s lifetime. This sharply  limits the range of problems they can solve: When the environment is clueless,  the mechanism will be, too. Domain-specific mechanisms are not limited in this  way. They can be constructed to embody clues that fill in the blanks when  perceptual evidence is lacking or difficult to obtain (Ermer et al. 2007, 157).
At this point, a  natural question to ask for the critic would be how natural selection is  supposed to operate if “relevant fitness information” is indeed not available.  As Buss puts it: would the result of a really “clueless environment” not be  extinction, rather than adaptation?
Cosmides and Tooby’s  third argument for the claim that domain-general systems could not live up to  the tasks our mind regularly solves concerns the general computational problems  faced by such systems. As they put it, a domain-general architecture “is defined  by what it lacks: It lacks any content, either in the form of domain-specific  knowledge or domain-specific procedures, that can guide it toward the solution  of an adaptive problem” (Cosmides and Tooby 1994, 94). Therefore, they argue, a  domain-general system must evaluate all alternatives it can define, and this  raises an obvious problem: “Permutations being what they are, alternatives  increase exponentially as the problem complexity increases. By the time you  analyze any biological problem of routine complexity, a mechanism that contains  no domain-specific rules of relevance, procedural knowledge, or privileged hypotheses  could not solve the problem in the amount of time the organism has to solve it”  (Cosmides and Tooby 1994, 94). Given that a specialization-free architecture  contains no rules of relevance, or domain-specialized procedural knowledge, to  restrict its search of a problem space, it could not solve any biological  problem of routine complexity in time.
These theoretical considerations  (see Samuels 1998 and Buller 2005, ch. 4 for criticism), together with the  empirical support for the modularity hypothesis that comes from cognitive  science (see section 1b), have led Evolutionary Psychologists to the conclusion  that “the mind is organized into modules or  mental organs, each with a specialized design that makes it an expert in one  area of interaction with the world” (Pinker 1997, 21). The mind is a Swiss Army  knife containing evolved, functionally specialized computational devices like, for  example, “face recognition systems, a language acquisition device, mindreading  systems, navigation specializations, animate motion recognition, cheater  detection mechanisms, and mechanisms that govern sexual attraction” (Cosmides  and Tooby 2003, 63).
Although there can be  little doubt that the mind is modular to some extent, it is currently a hotly  debated question exactly how modular it is. Is it really massively modular in the sense that it is a collection of hundreds  or thousands of modules, or is it modular in a weaker sense (see, for example, the  debate between Carruthers 2006, Prinz 2006, and Samuels 2006)? Interestingly, even  the most ardent advocates of Evolutionary Psychology have recently acknowledged  that “[t]he mind presumably does contain a number of functionally specialized  programs that are relatively content-free and domain-general,” but they have  insisted that “these can regulate behavior adaptively only if they work in  tandem with a bevy of content-rich, domain-specialized ones …” (Ermer et al. 2007, 156; see also Tooby and  Cosmides 1998, 200).
 e. Human Nature
According to  Evolutionary Psychologists, since the modules of which the human mind is made  up have been constantly selected for during a vast stretch of time there is  ample reason to think that “human  universals … exist at the level of the functionally described psychological  mechanism” (Tooby and Cosmides 1989, 36; italics added). That is, the modules  discovered by functional analysis constitute “an array of psychological  mechanisms that is universal among Homo  sapiens” (Symons 1992, 139), they are “the psychological universals that  constitute human nature” (Tooby and Cosmides 1990a, 19). As a consequence, Evolutionary  Psychology has the potential to discover a “human nature [that] is everywhere  the same” (Tooby and Cosmides 1992, 38).
Apart from the observation  that enough time has passed with constant selection pressures for our cognitive  modules virtually being driven to fixation, Cosmides and Tooby have offered two  arguments for the universality of our psychological adaptations (see also  Buller 2005, 73–4). The first argument is more or less a plausibility argument,  according to which since our bodies and our minds are both the result of  evolution by natural selection, and our bodies are universal, so should be our  minds:
[T]he fact that any given  page out of Gray’s Anatomy describes in precise anatomical detail individual  humans from around the world demonstrates the pronounced monomorphism present  in complex human physiological adaptations. Although we cannot directly ‘see’  psychological adaptations …, no less could be true of them. (Tooby and Cosmides  1992, 38)
The second argument first  appeared in Tooby and Cosmides (1990a), has been repeated in Tooby and Cosmides  (1992) and is treated by Evolutionary Psychologists as a definite proof of  universal panhuman design. In a nutshell, the argument is that since in sexual  reproduction a child’s genome is a mixture of its father’s and its mother’s genes,  and since cognitive adaptations are complex and thus not coded for by a single  gene but require hundreds or thousands of genes to work in concert for their  development, “it is improbable that all of the genes necessary for a complex  adaptation would be together in the same individual if the genes coding for the  components of complex adaptations varied substantially between individuals”  (Tooby and Cosmides 1992, 78–9).
If there is a complex series  of interdependent adaptations required to produce a sex, a behavioral strategy,  or a personality type, there is only one way to ensure the necessary  coordination. All of the parts of the genetic programs necessary to build the  integrated design must be present when needed in every individual of a given  type. The only way that the 50 genes, or 100 genes, or 1,000 genes that may be  required to assemble all of the features defining a given type can rely on each  other’s mutual presence is that they are all present in every individual. (Tooby  and Cosmides 1990a, 45)
Evolutionary  Psychologists are thus not claiming that human behavior or culture is the same everywhere.  Quite obviously, there is significant behavioral and cultural diversity  throughout the world. What they claim is that the genes that are required for our  cognitive adaptations to develop, and thus the cognitive adaptations  themselves, must be the same all over the world, although, of course, the  behavior that results from them may differ (for more on this, see section 4a).
 3. Examples of Empirical Research
Evolutionary Psychology  has sparked an enormous amount of empirical research covering nearly any  imaginable topic, including issues as diverse as language, morality, emotions,  parental investment, homicide, social coercion, rape, psychopathologies,  landscape preferences, spatial abilities, or pregnancy sickness (see, for  example, Buss 1999, 2005; Barkow et al.  1992 for an overview).
For instance, Margie  Profet (1992) has argued that pregnancy sickness—a set of symptoms like food  aversion, nausea, and vomiting that some women experience during the first three  months of pregnancy—is an adaptation for protecting the embryo against maternal  ingestion of toxins abundant in natural foods by lowering the typical human  threshold of tolerance to toxins during the period of the embryo’s maximum  susceptibility to toxins. Irwin Silverman and Marion Eals (1992) have argued  that from an evolutionary point of view the male advantage in spatial abilities  usually found in psychological experiments does not make sense. Although  hunting, the primary task of our male ancestors, clearly required spatial  abilities, no less is true of gathering plants, the primary task of our female  ancestors. In order to be efficient foragers, our female ancestors must have  been able to encode and remember the locations of thousands of different plants.  When Silverman and Eals designed spatial tests that measured subjects’ ability to  recall the location of items in a complex array or objects in a room, they  found that women indeed consistently recalled more objects than men did, and recalled  their location more accurately.
David Buss has argued that  there are major differences between males and females regarding mate choice and  jealousy that are evolved responses to different selection pressures (see, for  example, Buss 1992, 1994, 2000; Buss and Schmitt 1993). For instance, he  reasoned that because men need to guard against cuckoldry, while women need to  guard against losing their mate’s economic resources, men should be concerned more  by signs of sexual infidelity than about the loss of their partner’s emotional  attachment, while women should be troubled more by cues that signal emotional infidelity  than by signs of sexual infidelity. Buss et  al. (1992) asked males and females from the USA, Europe  and Asia whether they would be more distressed  by sexual or emotional infidelity:
Please think of a serious  committed romantic relationship that you have had in the past, that you  currently have, or that you would like to have. Imagine that you discover that  the person with whom you’ve been seriously involved became interested in  someone else. What would distress or upset you more (please circle only one):
(A) Imagining  your partner forming a deep emotional attachment to that person.
(B) Imagining  your partner enjoying passionate sexual intercourse with that other person.
(Buss et al. 1992, 252)
Nowhere did women  report sexual infidelity to be more upsetting than men, and on average, 51% of  the men, but only 22% of the women chose option B above (for data and critical  discussion, see Buller 2005, 316–45). These results have been taken to confirm Buss’  evolutionary hypothesis about sex differences with regard to jealousy (for a  dissenting view see, for example, DeSteno and Salovey 1996; Harris and  Christenfeld 1996).
The flagship example of  Evolutionary Psychology is still Cosmides and Tooby’s work on cheater detection. In the 1960s, the  Swedish psychologist Peter Wason devised the so-called “Wason Selection Task” in  order to investigate how good subjects are at checking conditional rules (Wason  1966). He gave subjects a rule of the form “If P, then Q” (for example, “If  a person goes to Boston,  then that person takes the subway”), and showed them four cards. Two of the  cards exemplified the P– and not-P-option, respectively (for example, “Boston” and “New York”), and two of them  exemplified the Q and not-Q-option, respectively (for example, “subway”  and “cab”). The subjects were told that the unseen sides of the P and not-P-cards could contain an instance of either Q or not-Q, and vice versa, and that they should indicate  all and only the cards that would definitely have to be turned over in order to  determine whether they violated the rule. Since a material conditional is false  if and only if its antecedent is true and its consequent is false, the  logically correct response would be to pick the P– and the not-Q-card. However,  Wason discovered that most subjects choose either only the P-card or the P– and the Q-card, while few choose the P– and the not-Q-card. More importantly, subjects’ performance was apparently influenced  by the content of the rules. While 48%  correctly solved the Boston/transportation problem, successful performance  dropped to less then 25% for the rule “If a person has a ‘D’ rating, then his  documents must be marked code ‘3’” (with the options ‘D’, ‘F’, ‘3’, ‘7’), and  increased to nearly 75% for the rule “If a person is drinking beer, then he  must be over 21 years old” (with the options “drinking beer,” “drinking coke,” “25  years old,” “16 years old”) (Cosmides and Tooby 1992, 182–3). By the 1980s, the  psychological literature was full with reports of such “content effects,” but  there was no satisfying theory to explain them.
Evolutionary biologists  had long been puzzled by our ability to engage in altruistic behavior—behavior  an individual A performs for the  benefit of another individual B,  associated with some significant cost for A (like warning calls, help in raising offspring, saving a drowning child, and so  forth). How could a tendency to behave in a way that increases another individual’s  fitness at some non-negligible cost to oneself be produced and retained by  natural selection? Robert Trivers (1971) argued that altruistic behavior can  evolve if it is reciprocal, that is, if A‘s act a has benefit bB  for B and cost cA for A, B reciprocates with some act a* with benefit bA for A and  cost cB for B, where bA outweighs cA  and bB outweighs cB. Interactions that satisfy  this cost-benefit structure constitute what is called a “social exchange.” Since  in social exchanges both A and B incur a net-benefit, Trivers reasoned,  altruistic behavior can evolve. Yet, the problem is that once a propensity for altruistic  behavior has evolved, it is obviously better for an individual to cheat by  accepting the benefit of an altruistic act without paying the cost of  reciprocation. In the long run, this would lead to an increase in the number of  cheaters until altruism was driven to extinction. In order for altruism to  evolve, Trivers (1971, 48) concluded, natural selection must “favor more acute  abilities to detect cheating.”
Cosmides and Tooby saw a  connection between the need to detect cheaters in acts of social exchange and the  content effect discovered by Wason (Cosmides 1989; Cosmides and Tooby 1989, 1992).  Since the ability to test abstract logical rules would not have had any adaptive  value in the EEA, we should not expect natural selection to have endowed the  human mind with some general conditional reasoning capacity. Rather, natural  selection should have designed a module that allows us to detect those who accept  the benefit without reciprocating accordingly in situations of social exchange.  Consequently, we should be better at testing social contract rules that say “If  person A provides the requested benefit to or meets the requirement of person  or group B, then B will provide the rationed benefit to A” (Cosmides and Tooby  2000, 1260) than at testing conditional rules that do not describe such  conditions.
When Cosmides and Tooby  categorized “content effects according to whether they conformed to social  contracts, a striking pattern emerged. Robust and replicable content effects  were found only for rules that related terms that are recognizable as benefits  and cost/requirements in the format of a standard social contract” (Cosmides  and Tooby 1992, 183). They argued that the content effect found in Wason  Selection Tasks is due to the fact that some tasks involve a social contract  rule.
In order to substantiate  this hypothesis, they conducted a series of experiments designed to rule out  alternative explanations of the content effects. One plausible explanation, for  instance, would be that our cognitive system is able to deal better and more  effectively with familiar problems (like  the drinking/age problem) than with unfamiliar problems (like the letter/number problem). They therefore compared performance  on unfamiliar social rules with performance on unfamiliar non-social rules. If familiarity  is the issue, then subjects should perform equally bad on both unfamiliar  rules. If, however, the increased performance in the drinking/age problem is  due to the fact that here the subjects are dealing with a social contract rule,  then performance should be better on the unfamiliar social than on the  unfamiliar non-social rule.
Cosmides designed two unfamiliar  Wason Selection Tasks. One rule read “If a man eats cassava root, then he must  have a tattoo on his face” (with the options “eats cassava root,” “eats molo  nuts,” “tattoo,” “no tattoo”). The other read “If you eat duiker meat, then you  have found an ostrich eggshell” (with the options “duiker,” “weasel,” “ostrich  eggshell,” “quail eggshell”). The first was accompanied by a story according to  which the inhabitants of a Polynesian island have strict sexual mores that  prohibit sex between unmarried people and thus mark married men with a facial  tattoo and do not permit unmarried men to eat cassava root, which is a very  powerful aphrodisiac. The second story said that anthropologists who notice  that the natives frequently say that if someone eats duiker meat, then he has  found an ostrich shell hypothesize that this is because duikers often feed on  ostrich shells. Thus, the first rule clearly represents a social  contract—having a tattoo is the requirement one has to meet if one is being  permitted the benefit of eating cassava root—while the second is a non-social  rule which simply expresses the hypothesis that duikers and ostrich eggs are frequently  found in close proximity.
The results confirmed the  cheater detection prediction (Cosmides and Tooby 1992, 186–7): 75% correctly answered  the unfamiliar social problem, but only 21% the unfamiliar non-social problem.
Cosmides also hypothesized  that if there is a cheater detection module, then subjects should pick the cards  that represent cheating even if they correspond to the logically incorrect answer. She thus switched the logical  role of the P/not-P– and the Q/not-Q-cards in both the  cassava root/tattoo and the duiker meat/ostrich shell problem. The switched rules  read “If a man has a tattoo on his face, then he eats cassava root” and “If you  have found an ostrich eggshell, then you eat duiker meat.” Since the not-P– and the Q-card (“no tattoo” and “eats cassava root”) still represent  accepting a benefit without meeting the requirement, the cheater detection  hypothesis predicts that subjects should pick the logically incorrect cards in  the first case, whereas performance in the ostrich shell/duiker meat case should  be unaffected. Again, the prediction was confirmed (Cosmides and Tooby 1992,  188–9): 67% of the subjects chose the logically incorrect not-P– and Q-cards in response to the switched social problem, but only 4% did  so for the switched non-social problem. (For a criticism of Cosmides and  Tooby’s work on cheater detection and for further references see Buller 2005, 163–90.)
 4. Problems and Objections
Evolutionary Psychology  is a successful research program, but it has its problems. Some difficulties have  already been mentioned in section 2 in connection with the theoretical underpinnings  of Evolutionary Psychology (for a recent critique of Evolutionary Psychology at  a methodological and conceptual level see Panksepp and Panksepp 2000). These  and a couple of others will be briefly reviewed in this section.
 a. Genetic Determinism
One of the most often heard  criticisms is also one of the least convincing. The charge is that Evolutionary  Psychology is committed to, or at least willfully embraces, a genetic determinism according to which our  behavior is determined by our genetic make-up, which, since it is a human universal,  cannot be influenced by means of social learning, education, and so forth, Dorothy  Nelkin (2000, 27), for instance, claims that Evolutionary Psychology implies  “genetic destiny,” and Robin Dunbar maintains that it seems “to be looking for  genetically determined characters that are universally valid for all humans,” observing  that this makes little sense because the “number of genuinely universal traits  are … likely to run to single figures at most” (Dunbar 1988, 168).
It is true that  Evolutionary Psychologists are looking for human universals, and it is also  true that they think that if humans were not genetically very similar, there could  be no cognitive adaptations (see section 2e). Yet, they are not committed to “a  form of ‘genetic determinism,’ if by that one means the idea that genes  determine everything, immune from an environmental influence” (Tooby and  Cosmides 1990a, 19). Their claim is that the cognitive mechanisms underlying behavior  are human universals, and that does not entail that our behavior is genetically  determined, or the same all over the world. Quite the contrary: It is  universally agreed among Evolutionary Psychologists that behavior, like any  other human trait, is the result of the complex interplay between genetic and  environmental factors. Genetic determinism is false because “every feature of  every phenotype is fully and equally codetermined by the interaction of the organism’s  genes … and its ontogenetic environments”  (Tooby and Cosmides 1992, 83; italics added), as is nicely illustrated by the  fact that not even genetic clones, monozygotic twins, are phenotypically identical.  In fact, work in Evolutionary Psychology has emphasized the highly flexible and  contingent nature of cognitive adaptations. For instance, Martin Daly and Margo  Wilson’s often cited work on violence toward children by stepparents (for  example, Daly and Wilson 1988a, 1988b) is in fact entirely concerned with contextual  factors—the presence of a stepparent in a household, they argue, is one of the  primary predictors of fatal violence toward children.
 b. Moral and Societal Issues
A related charge is  that Evolutionary Psychology is defending the status quo regarding sex, race, intelligence differences, and so  forth, by arguing that, first, there is nothing we can do, given that these  differences are the result of our hard-wired cognitive mechanisms, and, second,  there is no need to do something, because these differences, being the result  of natural selection, are optimal solutions to longstanding adaptive problems.
The first claim is just  wrong. As seen in section 4a, it is not “all in our genes” because the environment  heavily influences what behavior issues forth from cognitive mechanisms, even  if the latter are evolutionarily hard-wired.
The second claim is an  instance of what many scholars would regard as the fallacious inference from “is”  to “ought” (see Naturalistic Fallacy). As Robert Kurzban (2002) has pointed out, Evolutionary  Psychologists are well aware that it is illegitimate to move from the first to  the second, that there is a difference “between science, which can help us to  understand what is, and morality, which concerns questions about what ought to  be.” Regarding cognitive adaptations, one cannot infer “ought” from “is” because  (1) there is no guarantee that natural selection always finds an optimal  solution, (2) since the environment has changed, something that was good for  our ancestors may no longer be good for us, and (3) the sense in which it was “good”  for our ancestors that, say, they possessed a cognitive mechanism that  pre-disposed them to kill children of their mating partners that were not their  own (“good” in the sense of “fitness increasing”) is definitely not the sense  of “good” that is relevant to ethical discourse (“good” in the sense of  “morally praiseworthy/obligatory”).
 c. Untestability and Story Telling
One of the key problems  for Evolutionary Psychologists is to show that the adaptationist explanations they  offer are indeed explanations properly so called and not mere “just-so-stories”  that feature plausible scenarios without its being certain that they are  historical fact. Stephen Jay Gould, for instance, who famously criticized  evolutionary biology for its unreflected and widespread adaptationism that  tends to ignore other plausible evolutionary explanations (Gould and Lewontin  1979), has argued that the sole task of Evolutionary Psychology has become “a  speculative search for reasons why a behavior that harms us now must once have  originated for adaptive purposes” (Gould 2000, 119).
There is something to this  charge, but things are more difficult. Evolutionary Psychologists stress that “[i]t  is difficult to reconcile such claims with the actual practice of EP, since in  evolutionary psychology the evolutionary model or prediction typically precedes  and causes the discovery of new facts, rather than being constructed post hoc  to fit some known fact” (Sell et al. 2003,  52). The discussion of functional analysis in section 2b has shown that there  is a clear sense in which adaptationist hypotheses can be tested: functional analysis predicts the existence of yet  unknown cognitive mechanisms on the grounds of evolutionary reasoning about  potential adaptive problems in the EEA, and these predictions are then empirically  tested. The hypotheses Evolutionary Psychologists derive from their  computational theory thus allow them “to devise experiments that make possible  the detection and mapping of mechanisms that no one would otherwise have  thought to test for in the absence of such theories” (Sell et al. 2003, 48). It is therefore not true that “claims about an  EEA usually cannot be tested in principle but only subjected to speculation”  (Gould 1997, 51) because if the purported cognitive mechanisms fail to show up  in psychological experiments, the adapationist explanation is falsified.
First, however, this  holds only for research that conforms to Cosmides and Tooby’s theoretical model  (arguably, Cosmides and Tooby’s work on cheater detection, Buss’ work on sex  differences with regard to jealousy, and Silverman and Eals’ work on differences  in spatial abilities belong to this category). It does not apply to research  that does not generate a prediction based on a putative problem, but tries to  infer the historical function of an organism’s traits from its current  structure. Profet’s work on pregnancy sickness would be a case in point: here, one  already knows the trait (pregnancy sickness) and merely speculates about its historic  function, in contrast to the other cases, where the existence of the trait (an  ability to detect cheaters, sex specific responses to jealousy, or sex specific  spatial abilities) is inferred from evolutionary considerations about the problems  prevalent in the EEA.
Second, the  controversial claim is not that our psychological faculties have evolved. It is that they are adaptations, and, more specifically,  adaptations for solving particular  adaptive problems. Successful psychological tests that show that current Homo sapiens indeed possesses the  hypothesized cognitive mechanisms establish that these traits have evolved, but  they fail to establish that they are adaptations, let alone adaptations for,  say, detecting cheaters or remembering the location of edible plants. For all  these tests tell us, the traits in question could still be exaptations, or even  spandrels. In order to show that they are indeed adaptations, a point that is  forcefully made by Richardson  (2008), additional information would be needed, and it is not clear that this  additional information can be had (for a sketch of Richardson’s argument see Walter 2009).
Third, there seems to  be a sense in which adaptationist explanations are still “just-so-stories.” Functional  analysis relies on claims about the nature of the EEA which cannot be directly verified  because there is very little we can know with any confidence about the  conditions that obtained in the EEA. As Evolutionary Psychologists like to  point out, there are some things which have arguably stayed constant since the  EEA:
[R]esearchers know with  certainty of high confidence thousands of important things about our ancestors,  many of which can be used to derive falsifiable predictions about our  psychological architecture: our ancestors had two sexes; contracted infections  by contact, collected plant foods; inhabited a world where the motions of  objects conformed to the principles of kinematic geometry; had color vision;  were predated upon; had faces; lived in a biotic environment with a  hierarchical taxonomic structure, and so forth (Sell et al. 2003, 52–3).
The problem is that knowing  that our ancestors inhabited a world with two sexes where the motions of  objects conformed to the principles of kinematic geometry does not enable us to  formulate the adaptive problems our ancestors putatively faced in enough  detail. Both our male and female ancestors lived in such a world (as, by the  way, did the ancestors of apes, spiders and flies), and yet they evolved  different mating strategies, different responses to emotional versus sexual  infidelity, different spatial abilities, and so forth. The descriptions of the  past adaptive problems that Evolutionary Psychologists rely on in order to  explain these differences are much more specific than the platitudes of which  we can be relatively certain, and it is unclear how we could ever be confident  that we got the specific details right. As Stephen Jay Gould puts it vividly:
But how can we possibly  know in detail what small bands of hunter-gatherers did in Africa  two million years ago? These ancestors left some tools and bones, and  paleoanthropologists can make some ingenious inferences from such evidence. But  how can we possibly obtain the key information that would be required to show  the validity of adaptive tales about an EEA: relations of kinship, social  structures and sizes of groups, different activities of males and females, the  roles of religion, symbolizing, storytelling, and a hundred other central  aspects of human life that cannot be traced in fossils? (Gould 1997, §31; see  also Gould 2000, 120)
In the case of Buss’  research on the evolution of sex differences with regard to jealousy, for  instance, we can only hypothesize about such things as group structure and  size, mating structures, similarities between ancestral and current group  structures, or the alleged differences in mating behavior in ancestral groups  that are appealed to or presupposed in the formulation of the adaptive problem (again,  a point made convincingly by Richardson 2008).
Of course, as Sell et al. (2003) point out, if our  assumptions about our ancestors’ problems are wrong, our computational theory is  wrong, too, and should thus predict the existence of cognitive mechanisms that will  not be found when checked for empirically. Yet, even if this is so, the two  qualifications above apply to this move mutatis  mutandis. (For more on the role of historical evidence in the search for  adaptations and the kinds of problems that may arise, see Kaplan 2002.)
 d. Psychological Inadequacy
In Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the Persistent Quest for  Human Nature, David Buller argues “not only that the theoretical and  methodological doctrines of Evolutionary Psychology are problematic, but that  Evolutionary Psychology has not, in fact, produced any solid empirical results”  (Buller 2005, 15). What is wrong with Evolutionary Psychology is that the  psychological experiments used to establish the existence of the hypothesized cognitive  mechanisms in current Homo sapiens are  flawed because the data are exiguous, inconclusive and do not support the  claims made by Evolutionary Psychologists, as Buller tries to show in detail for  the classical studies of Cosmides and Tooby, Buss, and Daly and Wilson on  cheater detection, mating strategies, jealousy, and discriminative parenthood. Whereas  Richardson (2008)  claims that Evolutionary Psychology is problematic as Evolutionary Psychology,  Buller challenges the psychological credentials of evolutionary psychology,  arguing that Evolutionary Psychology fails as Evolutionary Psychology.
 5. Evolutionary Approaches to Mind, Culture, and Behavior: Alternatives to Evolutionary Psychology
In its broad sense,  evolutionary psychology attempts to adopt “an evolutionary perspective on human  behavior and psychology” (Barrett et al.  2002, 1) by applying Darwinian reasoning to behavioral, cognitive, social, or  cultural characteristics of humans. Evolutionary Psychology is one strand of  evolutionary psychology, but there are others, and the literature is full of different  labels: “sociobiology,” “evolutionary anthropology,” “human behavioral ecology,”  “Darwinian psychology,” “gene-culture coevolution,” to name just a few. These approaches  share the idea that evolutionary reasoning can enhance our understanding of  mind, culture, and society, but they disagree about exactly how Darwinian  thinking ought to enter the picture. This is not the place to go into the  details, but a brief survey of the theoretical landscape (see Laland and Brown  2002 for a book-length overview) may help to understand the difference between  evolutionary psychology as a general field  of inquiry and Evolutionary Psychology as a narrowly circumscribed research paradigm.
 a. Human Behavioral Ecology
Evolutionary  Psychologists insist that an evolutionary approach to human psychology must ask  whether a trait is an adaptation, not  whether it is currently adaptive. They  thereby separate themselves sharply from an approach Symons (1989) dubbed “Darwinian  anthropology” that instead focuses on the current adaptiveness of our behavior  (for a more reconciliatory approach see, for example, Downes 2001). Human behavioral ecology, as it is  nowadays called (Borgerhoff Mulder 1991), originated in the late 1970s when, after  the upheaval caused by Wilson’s Sociobiology,  some anthropologists decided to go out and test the controversial hypotheses of  Wilson and others by means of real data from hunter-gatherer populations  (Chagnon and Irons 1979; Hinde 1974). Using quantitative ethnographic  information and optimality models, human behavioral ecologists investigate  whether and how the current adaptiveness of an individual’s behavior is  influenced by its ecological and cultural environment and in which way the  different behaviors individuals develop to cope with environmental challenges  lead to and account for cultural differences between them.
Natural selection,  human behavioral ecologists argue, has created an extraordinary  flexibility—known as phenotypic  plasticity—that allows our “behavior to assume the form that maximizes  inclusive fitness” (Irons 1979, 33) across a wide variety of widely diverse  habitats. Since there has been selection for a general phenotypic plasticity,  we are not so much “adaptation executers” as rather “fitness maximizers”:  “Modern Darwinian theory predicts that human  behavior will be … designed to promote maximum reproductive success” (Turke  and Betzig 1985, 79; italics added). As a consequence, human behavioral  ecologists are less interested in discovering proximal cognitive mechanisms  than in checking whether the behavior they trigger is actually adaptive (a  strategy known as phenotypic gambit).
 b. Memetics
A rather different  approach is adopted by memetics (Blackmore 1999; Distin 2005). Memetics tries to explain cultural characteristics  and processes and the way they influence our behavior by postulating a process  of cultural evolution that is  analogous to the process of biological evolution, but largely independent of it.  Dawkins (1976) introduced the idea that evolution by natural selection is a substrate  neutral process that can act on what he called a “replicator,” that is, any  heritable entity for which there is variation in a population and that is  associated with different degrees of fitness. The gene, Dawkins said, is the replicator in biological evolution, but  the cultural realm also has a replicator, which he famously dubbed a meme: a meme is “a unit of cultural  inheritance, hypothesized as analogous to the particulate gene, and as  naturally selected in virtue of its phenotypic consequences on its own survival  and replication in the cultural environment” (Dawkins 1982, 290). Memes form  the substrate of cultural evolution, a process in which different memes are differentially  transmitted from individual to individual. One of the key challenges for  memetics is to spell out exactly what memes are, and although suggestions  abound, there is no agreed consensus [for instance, according to Dawkins “examples  of memes are tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of making pots  or of building arches” (Dawkins 1976, 206), while Dennett (1995, 347–8) cites  the ideas of the wheel, of wearing  clothes, the vendetta, the right triangle, the alphabet, chess, perspective  drawing, Impressionism, Greensleeves, and deconstructionism as examples].  Importantly, whatever memes are, they must be sufficiently similar to genes to  warrant the claim that cultural evolution is more or less analogous to  biological evolution, and critics of memetics argue that this constraint is  unlikely to be met (for example, Boyd and Richerson 2000; for a more optimistic  view, see Blackmore 1999, ch. 5).
 c. Gene-Culture Coevolution
Defenders of what is  known as “gene-culture coevolution” or “dual inheritance theory” (Boyd and  Richerson 1985, 2005a, 2005b; Cavalli-Sforza and Feldmann 1981; Durham 1991)  agree with memetics that transmitted cultural information is too important a factor  to be ignored by an evolutionary approach to human culture and behavior. After  all, one of the most striking facts about humans is that there are important  and persistent differences between human groups that are due to culturally  transmitted ideas, and not to genetic, biological, or ecological factors. Yet,  although culture is a Darwinian force in its own right, they argue, there is no  substantial analogy between cultural and biological evolution. In both  processes information is transmitted between individuals and both create  patterns of heritable variation, but the differences are much more salient: culture  is not based on direct replication but upon teaching, imitation, and other  forms of social learning, the transmission of culture is temporally extended  and not restricted to parents and their offspring, cultural evolution is not  necessarily particulate, and not necessarily random (Boyd and Richerson 2000).
Culture is part  of human biology, gene-culture coevolutionists argue, but accounts concerned  solely with genetic factors are inadequate because they ignore the fact that  culture itself shapes the adaptive environment in which biological evolution  takes place by creating a culturally constructed environment in which human  genes must evolve. Conversely, accounts aimed solely at explaining cultural  replication are also inadequate because they ignore the fact that genes affect  cultural evolution, for instance by forming psychological predispositions that  bias what people imitate, teach, or are able to learn. Hence, a truly  evolutionary approach to culture must acknowledge that genesand culture coevolve, and try to investigate the circumstances under which the  cultural habits adopted by individuals are influenced by their genes, and how the  natural selection pressures that guide biological evolution may be generated by  culture.
 6. References and Further Reading
 a. Suggested Further Reading

Barkow, Jerome, Leda  Cosmides, and John Tooby, eds. (1992). The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary  Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford:  Oxford University Press.

The manifesto of  Evolutionary Psychology.


Barrett, Louise,  Robin Dunbar, and John Lycett, eds. (2002). Human  Evolutionary Psychology. Princeton,   NJ: Princeton University  Press.

A very useful textbook of  evolutionary psychology in the broad sense, covering both Evolutionary Psychology  and Human Behavioral Ecology.


Buller, David (2005). Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology  and the Persistent Quest for Human Nature. Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.

A philosophical critique of  Evolutionary Psychology, arguing that the empirical tests Evolutionary  Psychologists rely on to establish that current Homo sapiens possesses the postulated cognitive adaptations in the  areas of cheater detection, mating, marriage, and parenthood are flawed.


Buss, David (1999). Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of  the Mind. Boston:  Allyn and Bacon.

The textbook of  Evolutionary Psychology, written by one of its most ardent advocates.


Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (1992). “Cognitive Adaptations for Social Exchange.” In: The  Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Eds. Jerome Barkow, Leda Cosmides,  and John Tooby. Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 163–228.

The classic paper on  cheater detection.


Dawkins, Richard (1976). The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University  Press.

A must-read for anyone  interested in evolutionary biology in general, in which Dawkins introduces the  concept of the meme and defends his theory of evolution from the gene’s  eye point of view (also known as the “selfish gene theory”) according to which the  ultimate beneficiary of the evolutionary process is neither the species, nor  the individual, nor a particular trait, but the gene.


Laland, Kevin, and  Gillian Brown (2002). Sense or Nonsense:  Evolutionary Perspectives on Human Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University  Press.

A highly laudable introduction  to sociobiology, Evolutionary Psychology, human behavioral ecology, memetics,  and gene-culture coevolution.


Pinker, Steven  (1997). How the Mind Works. New York: Norton.

A very accessible introduction  to Evolutionary Psychology and to the kinds of issues discussed in cognitive  science in general.


Pinker, Steven  (2002). The Blank Slate: The Modern  Denial of Human Nature. New York:  Penguin.

Another very accessible introduction  to the ideas of Evolutionary Psychology, written by one of the most gifted  writers in academia.


Richardson, Robert  (2008). Evolutionary Psychology as  Maladapted Psychology. Cambridge,   MA: MIT Press.

A philosophical critique  of Evolutionary Psychology from the perspective of evolutionary biology.


Samuels, Richard  (1998). “Evolutionary Psychology and the Massive Modularity Hypothesis.” British Journal for the Philosophy of  Science, 49, 575–602.

Criticizes Evolutionary  Psychology’s insistence on the domain-specificity of cognitive mechanisms,  arguing that a domain-general architecture that uses domain-specific  information would be equally good.


Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (1990a). “On the Universality  of Human Nature and the Uniqueness of the Individual: The Role of Genetics and  Adaptation.” Journal of  Personality, 58, 17–67.

Contains Cosmides and  Tooby’s genetic argument (discussed in section 2e) for the claim that our cognitive  adaptations are human universals.


Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (2005). “Conceptual Foundations of Evolutionary Psychology.” In: The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology.  Ed. David Buss. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 5–67.

A brief, but very valuable  overview over the theoretical background of Evolutionary Psychology.


Wright, Robert (1994). The Moral Animal. The New Science of  Evolutionary Psychology. New York:  Pantheon Books.

A simplifying introduction  to Evolutionary Psychology, written for a general audience, included here under  “Suggested Readings” only to stress that it is not to be recommended at all for anyone with a serious interest in Evolutionary  Psychology.



 b. Other Referenced Works

Blackmore, Susan (1999). The Meme Machine. Oxford:  Oxford University Press.
Boole, George (1847). The Mathematical Analysis of Logic. Cambridge: Macmillan.
Borgerhoff Mulder, Monique  (1991). “Human Behavioral Ecology.” In: Behavioral  Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Eds. John Krebs and Nicholas Davies. Oxford: Blackwell, 69–98.
Bowlby, John (1969). Attachment and Loss, Vol. 1: Attachment.  New York:  Basic Books.
Boyd, Robert, and  Peter Richerson (1985). Culture and the  Evolutionary Process. Chicago:  Chicago University Press.
Boyd, Robert, and  Peter Richerson (2000). “Memes: Universal Acid or a Better Mouse Trap.” In: Darwinizing  Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science. Ed. Robert Aunger. Oxford: Oxford University  Press, 143–62.
Boyd, Robert, and  Peter Richerson (2005a). Not by Genes  Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago: Chicago University  Press.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter  Richerson (2005b). The Origin and  Evolution of Cultures. Oxford:  Oxford University Press.
Buss, David (1992).  “Mate Preference Mechanisms: Consequences for Partner Choice and Intrasexual  Competition.” In: The Adapted Mind.  Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Eds. Jerome Barkow,  Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 249–66.
Buss, David (1994). The Evolution of Desire. Strategies of Human  Mating. New York:  Basic Books.
Buss, David (1995).  “Evolutionary Psychology: A New Paradigm for Psychological Science.” Psychological Inquiry, 6, 1–30.
Buss, David (2000). The Dangerous Passion: Why Jealousy is as  Necessary as Love and Sex. New    York: Simon and Schuster.
Buss, David, ed.  (2005). The Handbook of Evolutionary  Psychology. New York:  Wiley.
Buss, David, Randy  Larsen, Jennifer Semmelroth, and Drew Westin (1992). “Sex Differences in  Jealousy: Evolution, Physiology, and Psychology.” Psychological Science,  3, 251–5.
Buss, David, and David  Schmitt (1993). “Sexual Strategies Theory: An Evolutionary Perspective on Human  Mating.” Psychological Review, 100,  204–32.
Caro, Tim, and Monique  Borgerhoff Mulder (1987). “The Problem of Adaptation in the Study of Human  Behavior.” Ethology and Sociobiology,  8, 61–72.
Carruthers, Peter  (2006). “The Case for Massively Modular Models of Mind.” In: Contemporary Debates in Cognitive Science.  Ed. Robert Stainton. London:  Blackwell, 3–21.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luca,  and Marcus Feldman (1981). Cultural  Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton:  Princeton University Press.
Chagnon, Napoleon,  and William Irons, eds. (1979). Evolutionary  Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective. North Scituate, MA:  Duxbury Press.
Chomsky, Noam (1957). Syntactic Structures. Den Haag:  Mouton.
Chomsky, Noam (1959).  “A Review of B. F. Skinner’s Verbal Behavior.” Language, 35, 26–58.
Chomsky, Noam (1975). Reflections on Language. New York: Random House.
Cook, Edwin, Robert  Hodes, and Peter Lang (1986). “Preparedness and Phobia: Effects of Stimulus  Content on Human Visceral Conditioning.” Journal  of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 195–207.
Cosmides, Leda  (1989). “The Logic of Social Exchange: Has Natural Selection Shaped how Humans  Reason? Studies with the Wason Selection Task.” Cognition, 31, 187–276.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (1987). “From Evolution to Behavior: Evolutionary Psychology as the  Missing Link.” In: The Latest on the  Best: Essays on Evolution and Optimality. Ed. John Dupre. Cambridge, MA:  The MIT Press, 277–306.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (1989). “Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, Part  II. Case Study: A Computational Theory of Social Exchange.” Ethology and  Sociobiology, 10, 51–97.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (1991). “Reasoning and Natural Selection.” In: Encyclopedia of Human Biology. Ed. Renato Dulbecco. San Diego: Academic Press,  493–504.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (1994). “Origins of Domain Specificity: The Evolution of Functional  Organization.” In: Mapping the Mind:  Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture. Eds. Lawrence Hirschfeld and Susan  Gelman. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 85–116.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (1997). “The Modular Nature of Human Intelligence.” In: The Origin and Evolution of Intelligence.  Eds. Arnold Scheibel and William Schopf. Sudbury,   MA: Jones and Bartlett, 71–101.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (2000). “The Cognitive Neuroscience of Social Reasoning.” In: The  New Cognitive Neurosciences (2nd ed.). Ed. Michael Gazzaniga. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1259–70.
Cosmides, Leda, and  John Tooby (2003). “Evolutionary Psychology: Theoretical Foundations.” In: Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Ed.  Lynn Nadel. London:  Macmillan, 54–64.
Daly, Martin, and Margo  Wilson (1988a). Homicide. New York: de Gruyter.
Daly, Martin, and  Margo Wilson (1988b). “Evolutionary Social Psychology and Family Homicide.” Science, 242, 519–24.
Darwin, Charles  (1859/1964). On the Origin of Species.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University  Press.
Dawkins, Richard  (1982). The Extended Phenotype. Oxford: Oxford University  Press.
Dennett, Daniel  (1995). Darwin’s Dangerous Idea:  Evolution and the Meanings of Life. London:  Penguin.
DeSteno, David, and Peter  Salovey (1996). “Evolutionary Origins of Sex Differences in Jealousy?  Questioning the ‘Fitness’ of the Model.” Psychological  Science, 7, 367–72.
Distin, Kate (2005). The Selfish Meme. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press.
Downes, Stephen  (2001). “Some Recent Developments in Evolutionary Approaches to the Study of  Human Cognition and Behavior.” Biology  and Philosophy, 16, 575–95.
Dunbar, Robin (1988).  “Darwinizing Man: A Commentary.” In: Human  Reproductive Behavior. Eds. Laura Betzig, Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, and  Paul Turke. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 161–9.
Durham, William (1991). Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford: CSLI  Press.
Durrant, Russil, and Brian  Ellis (2003). “Evolutionary Psychology: Core Assumptions and Methodology.” In: Comprehensive Handbook of Psychology. Volume  Three: Biological Psychology. Eds. Michela Gallagher and Randy Nelson. New York: John Wiley and  Sons, 1–35.
Ermer, Elsa, Leda  Cosmides, and John Tooby (2007). “Functional Specialization and the  Adaptationist Program.” In: The Evolution  of Mind: Fundamental Questions and Controversies. Eds. Steven Gangstead and  Jeffry Simpson. New York, NY: The Guilford Press, 153–60.
Fodor, Jerry (1975). The Language of Thought. New York: Thomas  Crowell.
Fodor, Jerry (1981). Representations. Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.
Fodor, Jerry (1983). The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.
Frege, Gottlob  (1879). Begriffsschrift. Halle: Nebert.
Futuyama, Douglas (1998). Evolutionary  Biology (3rd ed.). Sunderland,   MA: Sinauer.
Galef, Bennett (1990).  “Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for Communication of Diet Preferences by Norway Rats.” Animal Learning and Behavior, 18, 347–52.
Garcia, John, and Robert  Koelling (1966). “Relation of Cue to Consequence in Avoidance Learning.” Psychonomic Science, 4, 123–4.
Gould, Stephen Jay  (1997). “Evolution: The Pleasures of Pluralism.” New York Review of Books, 44, 47–52.
Gould, Stephen Jay  (2000). “More Things in Heaven and Earth.” In: Alas Poor Darwin: Arguments Against Evolutionary  Psychology. Eds. Hilary Rose and Steven Rose. New York: Harmony Books, 101–26.
Gould, Stephen Jay,  and Richard Lewontin (1979). “The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian  Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B205, 581–98.
Harris, Christine and  Nicholas Christenfeld (1996). “Gender, Jealousy, and Reason.” Psychological Science, 7, 364–6.
Hinde, Robert (1974). Biological Bases of Human Social Behavior.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.
Irons, William  (1979). “Natural Selection, Adaptation, and Human Social Behavior.” In: Evolutionary Biology and Human Social  Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective. Eds. Napoleon Chagnon and William  Irons. North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press, 4–39.
Kaplan, Jonathan (2002).  “Historical Evidence and Human Adaptations.” Philosophy of Science, 69, S294–S304.
Kurzban, Robert  (2002). “Alas Poor Evolutionary Psychology: Unfairly Accused, Unjustly  Condemned.” Human Nature Review, 2, 99–109.
Lumsden, Charles, and  Edward Wilson (1981). Genes, Minds, and  Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Marr, David (1982). Vision: A Computational Investigation into  Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information. New York: Freeman.
Marks, Isaac and Randolph Nesse (1994).  “Fear and Fitness: An Evolutionary Analysis of Anxiety Disorders.” Ethology and Sociobiology, 15, 247–61.
Mineka, Susan, and Michael  Cook (1988). “Social Learning and the Acquisition of Snake Fear in Monkeys.”  In: Social Learning: Psychological and  Biological Perspectives. Eds. Thos Zentall and Bennett Galef. Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum, 51–73.
Nelkin, Dorothy  (2000). “Less Selfish than Sacred?: Genes and the Religious Impulse in Evolutionary  Psychology.” In: Alas Poor Darwin:  Arguments Against Evolutionary Psychology. Eds. Hilary Rose and Steven Rose.  New York:  Harmony Books, 17–32.
Newell, Allen, and  Herbert Simon (1961). “GPS, a Program that Simulates Thought.” In: Computers and Thought. Eds. Edward  Feigenbaum and Julian Feldman. New    York: McGraw-Hill, 279–93.
Newell, Allen, Cliff  Shaw, and Herbert Simon (1958). “Chess Playing Programs and the Problem of Complexity.” IBM Journal of Research and Development,  2, 320–5.
Newell, Allen, and  Herbert Simon (1972). Human Problem  Solving. Englewood  Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Panksepp, Jaak, and  Jules Panksepp (2000). “The Seven Sins of Evolutionary Psychology.” Evolution and Cognition, 6, 108–31.
Pinker, Steven  (1994). The Language Instinct: The New  Science of Language and Mind. New    York: William Morrow.
Prinz, Jesse (2006).  “Is the Mind Really Modular?” In: Contemporary  Debates in Cognitive Science. Ed. Robert Stainton. London: Blackwell, 22–36.
Profet, Margie  (1992). “Pregnancy Sickness as Adaptation: A Deterrent to Maternal Ingestion of  Teratogens.” In: The Adapted Mind.  Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Eds. Jerome Barkow,  Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 327–65.
Putnam, Hilary (1963).  “Brains and Behavior.” Analytical  Philosophy, Second Series. Ed. R.J. Butler. Oxford: Blackwell, 211–35.
Rose, Hilary, and  Steven Rose, eds. (2000). Alas Poor Darwin:  Arguments Against Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Harmony Books.
Samuels, Richard  (2006). “Is the Human Mind Massively Modular?” In: Contemporary Debates in Cognitive Science. Ed. Robert Stainton.  London: Blackwell, 37–56.
Schank, Roger, and Robert  Abelson (1977). Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry Into  Human Knowledge Structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Seligman, Martin, and  Joane Hagar, eds. (1972). Biological  Boundaries of Learning. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Sell, Aaron, Edward  Hagen, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby (2003). “Evolutionary Psychology:  Applications and Criticisms.” In: Encyclopedia  of Cognitive Science. Ed. Lynn Nadel. London: Macmillan, 47–53.
Silverman, Irwin, and  Marion Eals (1992). “Sex Differences in Spatial Abilities: Evolutionary Theory  and Data.” In: The Adapted Mind.  Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Eds. Jerome Barkow,  Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 533–49.
Skinner, Burrhus  Frederic (1938). The Behavior of  Organisms: An Experimental Analysis.  New York: Appleton-Century.
Skinner, Burrhus  Frederic (1957). Verbal Behavior. Acton, MA:  Copley Publishing Group.
Symons, Donald  (1987). “If We’re all Darwinians, What’s the Fuss About?” In: Sociobiology and Psychology: Ideas, Issues  and Applications. Eds. Charles Crawford, Martin Smith, and Dennis Krebs. Hilsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum, 121–45.
Symons, Donald  (1989). “A Critique of Darwinian Anthropology.” Ethology and Sociobiology, 10, 131–44.
Symons, Donald  (1990). “Adaptiveness and Adaptation.” Ethology  and Sociobiology, 11, 427–44.
Symons, Donald  (1992). “On the Use and Misuse of Darwinism in the Study of Human Behavior.” In: The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Eds. Jerome Barkow, Leda Cosmides,  and John Tooby. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 137–62.
Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (1989). “Evolutionary  Psychology and the Generation of Culture, Part   I. Theoretical Considerations.” Ethology and Sociobiology, 10, 29–49.
Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (1990b). “The Past Explains the Present: Emotional Adaptions and the  Structure of Ancestral Environments.” Ethology  and Sociobiology, 11, 375–424.
Tooby, John, and  Cosmides, Leda (1992). “The Psychological Foundations of Culture.” In: The  Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Eds. Jerome Barkow, Leda Cosmides,  and John Tooby. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 19–136.
Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (1995). “Foreword.” In: Mindblindness:  An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind, by Simon Baron-Cohen. Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press, xi–xviii.
Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (1998). “Evolutionizing the Cognitive Sciences: A Reply to Shapiro and  Epstein.” Mind and Language, 13, 195–204.
Tooby, John, and Leda  Cosmides (2000). “Toward Mapping the Evolved Functional Organization of Mind  and Brain.” In: The New Cognitive Neurosciences (2nd ed.). Ed. Michael Gazzaniga. Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press, 1167–78.
Trivers, Robert  (1971). “The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism.” Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 35–57.
Turing, Alan (1936).  “On Computable Numbers, with an Application  to the Entscheidungsproblem.” Proceedings  of the London  Mathematical Society, Series 2, 42, 230–65.
Turke, Paul and Laura  Betzig (1985). “Those Who Can do: Wealth, Status, and Reproductive Success on  Ifaluk.” Ethology and Sociobiology,  6, 79–87.
Walter, Sven (2009). “Review  of Richardson’s Evolutionary Psychology as Maladapted Psychology.” Mind.
Wason, Peter (1966). “Reasoning.”  In: New Horizons in Psychology. Ed. Brian Foss.  Harmondsworth: Penguin, 135–51.
Wilson, Edward  (1975). Sociobiology: The New Synthesis.  Cambridge MA:  Harvard University Press.

Author Information
Author Information
Sven Walter
Email: s.walter@philosophy-online.de
University of Osnabrueck
Germany





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







