








Law, Philosophy of | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Philosophy of Law
Philosophy of law (or legal philosophy) is concerned with providing a general  philosophical analysis of law and legal institutions. Issues in the field range from abstract conceptual questions about the nature of law and  legal systems to normative questions about the relationship between law and  morality and the justification for various legal institutions.
Topics in legal  philosophy tend to be more abstract than related topics in political philosophy and applied ethics. For example, whereas the question of how properly to  interpret the U.S. Constitution belongs to democratic theory (and hence falls  under the heading of political philosophy), the analysis of legal interpretation  falls under the heading of legal philosophy. Likewise, whereas the question of  whether capital punishment is morally permissible falls under the heading of  applied ethics, the question of whether the institution of punishment can be  justified falls under the heading of legal philosophy.
There are  roughly three categories into which the topics of legal philosophy fall: analytic jurisprudence,  normative jurisprudence, and critical theories of law. Analytic jurisprudence involves providing an analysis of the essence of law so as to understand what differentiates it from  other  systems of norms, such as ethics.     Normative jurisprudence  involves the examination of normative, evaluative, and otherwise prescriptive issues about the law, such as restrictions on freedom, obligations to obey the law, and the grounds for punishment. Finally, critical theories of law, such as critical legal studies and feminist jurisprudence, challenge more traditional forms of legal philosophy.
Table of Contents

 Analytic Jurisprudence

Natural Law Theory
Legal Positivism

The Conventionality Thesis
The Social Fact Thesis
The Separability Thesis


Ronald Dworkin’s Third Theory


Normative Jurisprudence

Freedom and the Limits of Legitimate Law

Legal Moralism
Legal Paternalism
The Offense Principle


The Obligation to Obey Law
The Justification of Punishment


Critical Theories of Law

Legal Realism
Critical Legal Studies
Law and Economics
Outsider Jurisprudence


References and Further Reading

 1. Analytic Jurisprudence
The principal objective of analytic jurisprudence has traditionally  been to provide an account of what distinguishes law as a system of norms  from other systems of norms, such as ethical norms.  As John Austin  describes the project, analytic jurisprudence seeks “the essence or nature  which is common to all laws that are properly so called” (Austin 1995, p.  11).  Accordingly, analytic jurisprudence is concerned with providing  necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of law that  distinguish law from non-law.
While this task is usually interpreted as an attempt to analyze the  concepts of law and legal system, there is some confusion as to both the  value and character of conceptual analysis in philosophy of law.  As Brian  Leiter (1998) points out, philosophy of law is one of the few philosophical  disciplines that takes conceptual analysis as its principal concern; most  other areas in philosophy have taken a naturalistic turn, incorporating the  tools and methods of the sciences.  To clarify the role of conceptual  analysis in law, Brian Bix (1995) distinguishes a number of different  purposes that can be served by conceptual claims:

 to track linguistic      usage;
 to stipulate meanings;
 to explain what is important or      essential about a class of objects; and
 to establish an evaluative test      for the concept-word.

Bix takes conceptual analysis in law to be primarily    concerned with (3) and (4).
In any event, conceptual analysis of law remains an important, if  controversial, project in contemporary legal theory.  Conceptual theories  of law can be divided into two main headings: (a) those that affirm there is a  conceptual relation between law and morality and (b) those that deny that there  is such a relation.  Nevertheless, Ronald Dworkin’s view is often  characterized as a third theory partly because it is not clear where he  stands on the question of whether there is a conceptual relation between  law and morality.
 a. Natural Law Theory
All forms of natural law theory subscribe to the Overlap Thesis, which  is that there is a necessary relation between the concepts of law and  morality.  According to this view, then, the concept of law cannot be fully  articulated without some reference to moral notions.  Though the Overlap  Thesis may seem unambiguous, there are a number of different ways in which  it can be interpreted.
The strongest form of the Overlap Thesis underlies the classical  naturalism of St. Thomas Aquinas and William Blackstone.  As Blackstone describes the thesis:
This law of nature, being co-eval with mankind and dictated by God      himself, is of course superior in obligation to any other.  It is binding      over all the globe, in all countries, and at all times: no human laws are      of any validity, if contrary to this; and such of them as are valid derive      all their force, and all their authority, mediately or immediately, from      this original (1979, p. 41).
In this passage, Blackstone articulates the    two claims that constitute the theoretical core of classical naturalism: 1)    there can be no legally valid standards that conflict with the natural law;    and 2) all valid laws derive what force and authority they have from the    natural law.  On this view, to paraphrase Augustine, an unjust law is no    law at all.
Related to Blackstone’s classical naturalism is the neo-naturalism of  John Finnis (1980).  Finnis believes that the naturalism of Aquinas and  Blackstone should not be construed as a conceptual account of the existence  conditions for law.  According to Finnis (see also Bix, 1996), the  classical naturalists were not concerned with giving a conceptual account  of legal validity; rather they were concerned with explaining the moral  force of law: “the principles of natural law explain the obligatory force  (in the fullest sense of “obligation”) of positive laws, even when those  laws cannot be deduced from those principles” (Finnis 1980, pp. 23-24).  On  Finnis’s view of the Overlap Thesis, the essential function of law is to  provide a justification for state coercion.  Accordingly, an unjust law can  be legally valid, but cannot provide an adequate justification for use of  the state coercive power and is hence not obligatory in the fullest sense;  thus, an unjust law fails to realize the moral ideals implicit in the  concept of law.  An unjust law, on this view, is legally binding, but is  not fully law.
Lon Fuller (1964) rejects the idea that there are necessary moral  constraints on the content of law.  On Fuller’s view, law is necessarily  subject to a procedural morality consisting of eight principles:
P1: the rules must be expressed in general terms;
P2: the rules must be      publicly promulgated;
P3: the rules must be prospective in effect;
P4:      the rules must be expressed in understandable terms;
P5: the rules must be      consistent with one another;
P6: the rules must not require conduct beyond      the powers of the affected parties;
P7: the rules must not be changed so      frequently that the subject cannot rely on them; and
P8: the rules must be      administered in a manner consistent with their wording.
On Fuller’s view, no system of rules that fails minimally to satisfy  these principles of legality can achieve law’s essential purpose of  achieving social order through the use of rules that guide behavior.  A  system of rules that fails to satisfy (P2) or (P4), for example, cannot  guide behavior because people will not be able to determine what the rules  require.  Accordingly, Fuller concludes that his eight principles are  “internal” to law in the sense that they are built into the existence  conditions for law: “A total failure in any one of these eight directions  does not simply result in a bad system of law; it results in something that  is not properly called a legal system at all” (1964, p. 39).
 b. Legal Positivism
Opposed to all forms of naturalism is legal positivism, which is  roughly constituted by three theoretical commitments: (i) the Social Fact  Thesis, (ii) the Conventionality Thesis, and (iii) the Separability Thesis.  The    Social Fact Thesis (which is also known as the Pedigree Thesis) asserts  that it is a necessary truth that legal validity is ultimately a function  of certain kinds of social facts.  The Conventionality Thesis emphasizes  law’s conventional nature, claiming that the social facts giving rise to  legal validity are authoritative in virtue of some kind of social  convention.  The Separability Thesis, at the most general level, simply  denies naturalism’s Overlap Thesis; according to the Separability Thesis,  there is no conceptual overlap between the notions of law and morality.
 i.  The Conventionality Thesis
According to the Conventionality Thesis, it is a conceptual truth about    law that legal validity can ultimately be explained in terms of criteria    that are authoritative in virtue of some kind of social convention.  Thus,    for example, H.L.A. Hart (1996) believes the criteria of legal validity are    contained in a rule of recognition that sets forth rules for creating,    changing, and adjudicating law.  On Hart’s view, the rule of recognition is    authoritative in virtue of a convention among officials to regard its    criteria as standards that govern their behavior as officials.  While    Joseph Raz does not appear to endorse Hart’s view about a master rule of    recognition containing the criteria of validity, he also believes the    validity criteria are authoritative only in virtue of a convention among    officials.
 ii. The Social Fact Thesis
The Social Fact Thesis asserts that legal validity is a function of  certain social facts.  Borrowing heavily from Jeremy Bentham, John Austin  (1995) argues that the principal distinguishing feature of a legal system  is the presence of a sovereign who is habitually obeyed by most people in  the society, but not in the habit of obeying any determinate human  superior.  On Austin’s view, a rule R is legally valid (that is, is a law) in  a society S if and only if R is commanded by the sovereign in S and is  backed up with the threat of a sanction.  The relevant social fact that  confers validity, on Austin’s view, is promulgation by a sovereign willing  to impose a sanction for noncompliance.
Hart takes a different view of the Social Fact Thesis.  Hart believes  that Austin’s theory accounts, at most, for one kind of rule: primary rules  that require or prohibit certain kinds of behavior.  On Hart’s view, Austin  overlooked the presence of other primary rules that confer upon citizens  the power to create, modify, and extinguish rights and obligations in other  persons.  As Hart points out, the rules governing the creation of contracts  and wills cannot plausibly be characterized as restrictions on freedom that  are backed by the threat of a sanction.
Most importantly, however, Hart argues Austin overlooks the existence  of secondary meta-rules that have as their subject matter the primary rules  themselves and distinguish full-blown legal systems from primitive systems  of law:
[Secondary rules] may all be said to be on a different level  from the primary rules, for they are all about such rules; in the  sense that while primary rules are concerned with the actions that  individuals must or must not do, these secondary rules are all concerned  with the primary rules themselves.  They specify the way in which the  primary rules may be conclusively ascertained, introduced, eliminated,  varied, and the fact of their violation conclusively determined (Hart 1994,  p. 92).
Hart distinguishes three types of secondary rules that mark the  transition from primitive forms of law to full-blown legal systems: (1) the    rule of recognition, which “specif[ies] some feature or features possession  of which by a suggested rule is taken as a conclusive affirmative  indication that it is a rule of the group to be supported by the social  pressure it exerts” (Hart 1994, p. 92); (2) the rule of change, which  enables a society to add, remove, and modify valid rules; and (3) the rule  of adjudication, which provides a mechanism for determining whether a valid  rule has been violated.  On Hart’s view, then, every society with a  full-blown legal system necessarily has a rule of recognition that  articulates criteria for legal validity that include provisions for making,  changing and adjudicating law.  Law is, to use Hart’s famous phrase, “the  union of primary and secondary rules” (Hart 1994, p. 107).
According to Hart’s view of the Social Fact Thesis, then, a proposition  P is legally valid in a society S if and only if it satisfies the criteria  of validity contained in a rule of recognition that is binding in S.  As we  have seen, the Conventionality Thesis implies that a rule of recognition is  binding in S only if there is a social convention among officials to treat  it as defining standards of official behavior.  Thus, on Hart’s view,  “[the] rules of recognition specifying the criteria of legal validity and  its rules of change and adjudication must be effectively accepted as common  public standards of official behaviour by its officials” (Hart 1994, p.  113).
 iii.  The Separability Thesis
The final thesis comprising the foundation of legal positivism is the  Separability Thesis.  In its most general form, the Separability Thesis  asserts that law and morality are conceptually distinct.  This abstract  formulation can be interpreted in a number of ways.  For example, Klaus  F¸þer (1996) interprets it as making a meta-level claim that the definition  of law must be entirely free of moral notions.  This interpretation implies  that any reference to moral considerations in defining the related notions  of law, legal validity, and legal system is inconsistent with the  Separability Thesis.
More commonly, the Separability Thesis is interpreted as making only an  object-level claim about the existence conditions for legal validity.  As  Hart describes it, the Separability Thesis is no more than the “simple  contention that it is in no sense a necessary truth that laws reproduce or  satisfy certain demands of morality, though in fact they have often done  so” (Hart 1994, pp. 181-82).  Insofar as the object-level interpretation of  the Separability Thesis denies it is a necessary truth that there are moral  constraints on legal validity, it implies the existence of a possible legal  system in which there are no moral constraints on legal validity.
Though all positivists agree there are possible legal systems without  moral constraints on legal validity, there are conflicting views on whether  there are possible legal systems with such constraints.  According  to inclusive positivism (also known as incorporationism and soft  positivism), it is possible for a society’s rule of recognition to  incorporate moral constraints on the content of law.  Prominent inclusive  positivists include Jules Coleman and Hart, who maintains that “the rule of  recognition may incorporate as criteria of legal validity conformity with  moral principles or substantive values … such as the Sixteenth or  Nineteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution respecting the  establishment of religion or abridgements of the right to vote” (Hart 1994,  p. 250).
In contrast, exclusive positivism (also called hard positivism) denies  that a legal system can incorporate moral constraints on legal validity.   Exclusive positivists like Raz (1979) subscribe to the Source Thesis,  according to which the existence and content of law can always be  determined by reference to its sources without recourse to moral argument.   On this view, the sources of law include both the circumstances of its  promulgation and relevant interpretative materials, such as court cases  involving its application.
 c. Ronald Dworkin’s Third Theory
Ronald Dworkin rejects positivism’s Social Fact Thesis on the ground  that there are some legal standards the authority of which cannot be  explained in terms of social facts.  In deciding hard cases, for example,  judges often invoke moral principles that Dworkin believes do not derive  their legal authority from the social criteria of legality contained  in a rule of recognition (Dworkin 1977, p. 40).  Nevertheless, since judges  are bound to consider such principles when relevant, they must be  characterized as law.  Thus, Dworkin concludes, “if we treat principles as  law we must reject the positivists’ first tenet, that the law of a  community is distinguished from other social standards by some test in the  form of a master rule” (Dworkin 1977, p. 44).
Dworkin believes adjudication is and should be interpretive: “judges  should decide hard cases by interpreting the political structure of their  community in the following, perhaps special way: by trying to find the best  justification they can find, in principles of political morality,  for the structure as a whole, from the most profound constitutional rules  and arrangements to the details of, for example, the private law of tort or  contract” (Dworkin 1982, p. 165).  There are, then, two elements of a  successful interpretation.  First, since an interpretation is successful  insofar as it justifies the particular practices of a particular society,  the interpretation must fit with those practices in the sense that  it coheres with existing legal materials defining the practices.  Second,  since an interpretation provides a moral justification for those  practices, it must present them in the best possible moral light.  Thus,  Dworkin argues, a judge should strive to interpret a case in roughly the  following way:
A thoughtful judge might establish for himself, for example, a  rough “threshold” of fit which any interpretation of data must meet in  order to be “acceptable” on the dimension of fit, and then suppose that if  more than one interpretation of some part of the law meets this threshold,  the choice among these should be made, not through further and more precise  comparisons between the two along that dimension, but by choosing the  interpretation which is “substantively” better, that is, which better  promotes the political ideals he thinks correct (Dworkin 1982, p.  171).
Accordingly, on Dworkin’s view, the legal authority of a binding  principle derives from the contribution it makes to the best moral  justification for a society’s legal practices considered as a whole.  Thus,  a legal principle maximally contributes to such a justification if and only  if it satisfies two conditions:

the principle coheres with existing      legal materials; and
 the principle is the most morally attractive      standard that satisfies (1).

The correct legal principle is the one that    makes the law the moral best it can be.
In later writings, Dworkin expands the scope of his “constructivist”  view beyond adjudication to encompass the realm of legal theory.  Dworkin  distinguishes conversational interpretation from artistic/creative  interpretation and argues that the task of interpreting a social practice  is more like artistic interpretation:
The most familiar occasion of interpretation is conversation.   We interpret the sounds or marks another person makes in order to decide  what he has said.  Artistic interpretation is yet another: critics  interpret poems and plays and paintings in order to defend some view of  their meaning or theme or point.  The form of interpretation we are  studying-the interpretation of a social practice-is like artistic  interpretation in this way: both aim to interpret something created by  people as an entity distinct from them, rather than what people say, as in  conversational interpretation” (Dworkin 1986, p. 50).
Artistic interpretation, like judicial interpretation, is constrained  by the dimensions of fit and justification: “constructive interpretation is  a matter of imposing purpose on an object or practice in order to make of  it the best possible example of the form or genre to which it is taken to  belong” (Dworkin 1986, p. 52).
On Dworkin’s view, the point of any general theory of law is to  interpret a very complex set of related social practices that are “created  by people as an entity distinct from them”; for this reason, Dworkin  believes the project of putting together a general theory of law is  inherently constructivist:
General theories of law  must be abstract because they aim to  interpret the main point and structure of legal practice, not some  particular part or department of it.  But for all their abstraction, they  are constructive interpretations: they try to show legal practice as a  whole in its best light, to achieve equilibrium between legal practice as  they find it and the best justification of that practice.  So no firm line  divides jurisprudence from adjudication or any other aspect of legal  practice (Dworkin 1986, p. 90).
Indeed, so tight is the relation between jurisprudence and adjudication,  according to Dworkin, that jurisprudence is no more than the most general  part of adjudication; thus, Dworkin concludes, “any judge’s opinion is  itself a piece of legal philosophy” (Dworkin 1986, p. 90).
Accordingly, Dworkin rejects not only positivism’s Social Fact Thesis,  but also what he takes to be its underlying presuppositions about legal  theory.  Hart distinguishes two perspectives from which a set of legal  practices can be understood.  A legal practice can be understood from the  “internal” point of view of the person who accepts that practice as  providing legitimate guides to conduct, as well as from the “external”  point of view of the observer who wishes to understand the practice but  does not accept it as being authoritative or legitimate.
Hart understands his theory of law to be both descriptive and general  in the sense that it provides an account of fundamental features common to  all legal systems-which presupposes a point of view that is external to all  legal systems.  For this reason, he regards his project as “a radically  different enterprise from Dworkin’s conception of legal theory (or  ‘jurisprudence’ as he often terms it) as in part evaluative and  justificatory and as ‘addressed to a particular legal culture’, which is  usually the theorist’s own and in Dworkin’s case is that of Anglo-American  law” (Hart 1994, p. 240).
These remarks show Hart believes Dworkin’s theoretical objectives are  fundamentally different from those of positivism, which, as a theory of  analytic jurisprudence, is largely concerned with conceptual analysis.  For  his part, Dworkin conceives his work as conceptual but not in the same  sense that Hart regards his work:
We all-at least all lawyers-share a concept of law and of legal  right, and we contest different conceptions of that concept.  Positivism  defends a particular conception, and I have tried to defend a competing  conception.  We disagree about what legal rights are in much the same way  as we philosophers who argue about justice disagree about what justice is.   I concentrate on the details of a particular legal system with which I am  especially familiar, not simply to show that positivism provides a poor  account of that system, but to show that positivism provides a poor  conception of the concept of a legal right (Dworkin 1977,  351-52).
These differences between Hart and Dworkin have led many legal  philosophers, most recently Bix (1996), to suspect that they are not really  taking inconsistent positions at all.  Accordingly, there remains an issue  as to whether Dworkin’s work should be construed as falling under the  rubric of analytic jurisprudence.
 2. Normative Jurisprudence
Normative jurisprudence involves normative, evaluative, and otherwise prescriptive questions about the law. Here we will examine three key issues: (a) when and to what extent  laws can restrict the freedom of citizens, (b) the nature of one’s obligation to obey the law, and (c)  the justification of punishment by law.
 a. Freedom and the Limits of Legitimate Law
Laws limit human autonomy by restricting freedom.  Criminal laws, for  example, remove certain behaviors from the range of behavioral options by  penalizing them with imprisonment and, in some cases, death.  Likewise,  civil laws require people to take certain precautions not to injure others  and to honor their contracts.  Given that human autonomy deserves prima  facie moral respect, the question arises as to what are the limits of  the state’s legitimate authority to restrict the freedom of its citizens.
John Stuart Mill provides the classic liberal answer in the form of the  harm principle:
[T]he sole end for which mankind are warranted,      individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of      any of their number is self-protection.  The only purpose for which power      can rightfully be exercised over any member of a civilised community      against his will is to prevent harm to others.  His own good, either      physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant.  Over himself, over his      own body and mind, the individual is sovereign (Mill 1906, pp. 12-13).
While Mill left the notion of harm underdeveloped, he is most frequently      taken to mean only physical harms and more extreme forms of psychological      harm.
Though Mill’s view—or something like it—enjoys currency among the  public, it has generated considerable controversy among philosophers of law  and political philosophers.  Many philosophers believe that Mill  understates the limits of legitimate state authority over the individual,  claiming that law may be used to enforce morality, to protect the  individual from herself, and in some cases to protect individuals from  offensive behavior.
 i. Legal Moralism
Legal moralism is the view that the law can legitimately be used to  prohibit behaviors that conflict with society’s collective moral judgments  even when those behaviors do not result in physical or psychological harm  to others.  According to this view, a person’s freedom can legitimately be  restricted simply because it conflicts with society’s   collective morality; thus, legal moralism implies that it is permissible  for the state to use its coercive power to enforce society’s collective  morality.
The most famous legal moralist is Patrick Devlin, who argues that a  shared morality is essential to the existence of a society:
[I]f men and women try to create a society in which there is no  fundamental agreement about good and evil they will fail; if, having based  it on common agreement, the agreement goes, the society will disintegrate.   For society is not something that is kept together physically; it is held  by the invisible bonds of common thought.  If the bonds were too far  relaxed the members would drift apart.  A common morality is part of the  bondage.  The bondage is part of the price of society; and mankind, which  needs society, must pay its price.  (Devlin 1965, p. 10).
Insofar as human beings cannot lead a meaningful existence outside of  society, it follows, on Devlin’s view, that the law can be used to preserve  the shared morality as a means of preserving society itself.
H.L.A. Hart (1963) points out that Devlin overstates the extent to  which preservation of a shared morality is necessary to the continuing  existence of a society.  Devlin attempts to conclude from the necessity of  a shared social morality that it is permissible for the state to legislate  sexual morality (in particular, to legislate against same-sex sexual  relations), but Hart argues it is implausible to think that “deviation from  accepted sexual morality, even by adults in private, is something which,  like treason, threatens the existence of society” (Hart 1963, p. 50).   While enforcement of certain social norms protecting life, safety, and  property are likely essential to the existence of a society, a society can  survive a diversity of behavior in many other areas of moral concern-as is  evidenced by the controversies in the U.S. surrounding abortion and  homosexuality.
 ii. Legal Paternalism
Legal paternalism is the view that it is permissible for the state to  legislate against what Mill calls “self-regarding actions” when necessary to  prevent individuals from inflicting physical or severe emotional harm on    themselves.  As Gerald Dworkin describes it, a paternalist  interference is an “interference with a person’s liberty of action  justified by reasons referring exclusively to the welfare, good, happiness,  needs, interests or values of the person being coerced” (G. Dworkin 1972,  p. 65).  Thus, for example, a law requiring use of a helmet when riding a  motorcycle is a paternalistic interference insofar as it is justified by  concerns for the safety of the rider.
Dworkin argues that Mill’s view that a person “cannot rightfully be  compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him” (Mill 1906,  p. 13) precludes paternalistic legislation to which fully rational  individuals would agree.  According to Dworkin, there are goods, such as  health and education, that any rational person needs to pursue her own  good-no matter how that good is conceived.  Thus, Dworkin concludes, the  attainment of these basic goods can legitimately be promoted in certain  circumstances by using the state’s coercive force.
Dworkin offers a hypothetical consent justification for his limited  legal paternalism.  On his view, there are a number of different situations  in which fully rational adults would consent to paternalistic restrictions  on freedom.  For example, Dworkin believes a fully rational adult would  consent to paternalistic restrictions to protect her from making decisions  that are “far-reaching, potentially dangerous and irreversible” (G. Dworkin  1972, p. 80).  Nevertheless, he argues that there are limits to legitimate  paternalism: (1) the state must show that the behavior governed by the  proposed restriction involves the sort of harm that a rational person would  want to avoid; (2) on the calculations of a fully rational person, the  potential harm outweighs the benefits of the relevant behavior; and (3) the  proposed restriction is the least restrictive alternative for protecting  against the harm.
 iii.  The Offense Principle
Joel Feinberg believes the harm principle does not provide sufficient  protection against the wrongful behaviors of others, as it is inconsistent  with many criminal prohibitions we take for granted as being justified.  If  the only legitimate use of the state coercive force is to protect people  from harm caused by others, then statutes prohibiting public sex are  impermissible because public sex might be offensive but it does not cause  harm (in the Millian sense) to others.
Accordingly, Feinberg argues the harm principle must be augmented by the    offense principle, which he defines as follows: “It is always a good reason  in support of a proposed criminal prohibition that it would probably be an  effective way of preventing serious offense (as opposed to injury or harm)  to persons other than the actor, and that it is probably a necessary means  to that end” (Feinberg 1985).  By “offense,” Feinberg intends a subjective  and objective element: the subjective element consists in the experience of  an unpleasant mental state (for example, shame, disgust, anxiety, embarrassment);  the objective element consists in the existence of a wrongful cause of such  a mental state.
 b. The Obligation to Obey Law
Natural law critics of positivism (for example, Fuller 1958) frequently  complain that if positivism is correct, there cannot be a moral obligation  to obey the law qua law (that is, to obey the law as such, no matter what the laws are, simply because it is the law).  As Feinberg (1979) puts the point:
The positivist account of legal validity  is hard to reconcile  with the [claim]  that valid law as such, no matter what its content,  deserves our respect and general fidelity.  Even if valid law is bad law,  we have some obligation to obey it simply because it is law.  But how can  this be so if a law’s validity has nothing to do with its  content?
The idea is this: if what is essential to law is just that there exist  specified recipes for making law, then there cannot be a moral obligation  to obey a rule simply because it is the law.
Contemporary positivists, for the most part, accept the idea that  positivism is inconsistent with an obligation to obey law qua law (compare Himma 1998), but argue that the mere status of a norm as law cannot give  rise to any moral obligation to obey that norm.  While there might be a  moral obligation to obey a particular law because of its moral content  (for example, laws prohibiting murder) or because it solves a coordination problem  (for example, laws requiring people to drive on the right side of the road), the  mere fact that a rule is law does not provide a moral reason for doing what  the law requires.
Indeed, arguments for the existence of even a prima facie obligation to obey law (that is, an obligation that can be outweighed by  competing obligations) have largely been unsuccessful.  Arguments in favor  of an obligation to obey the law roughly fall into four categories: (1)  arguments from gratitude; (2) arguments from fair play; (3) arguments from  implied consent; and (4) arguments from general utility.
The argument from gratitude begins with the observation that all  persons, even those who are worst off, derive some benefit from the state’s  enforcement of the law.  On this view, a person who accepts benefits from  another person thereby incurs a duty of gratitude towards the benefactor.   And the only plausible way to discharge this duty towards the government is  to obey its laws.  Nevertheless, as M.B.E. Smith points out (1973, p. 953),  “if someone confers benefits on me without any consideration of whether I  want them, and if he does this in order to advance some purpose other than  promotion of my particular welfare, I have no obligation to be grateful  towards him.”  Since the state does not give citizens a choice with respect  to such benefits, the mere enjoyment of them cannot give rise to a duty of  gratitude.
John Rawls (1964) argues that there is a moral obligation to obey law  qua law in societies in which there is a mutually beneficial and just  scheme of social cooperation.  What gives rise to a moral obligation to  obey law qua law in such societies is a duty of fair play: fairness  requires obedience of persons who intentionally accept the benefits made  available in a society organized around a just scheme of mutually  beneficial cooperation.  There are a couple of problems here.  First,  Rawls’s argument does not establish the existence of a content-independent  obligation to obey law; the obligation arises only in those societies that  institutionalize a just scheme of social cooperation.  Second, even in such  societies, citizens are not presented with a genuine option to refuse those  benefits.  For example, I cannot avoid the benefits of laws ensuring clean  air.  But accepting benefits one is not in a position to refuse cannot give  rise to an obligation of fair play.
The argument from consent grounds an obligation to obey law on some  sort of implied promise.  As is readily evident, we can voluntarily assume  obligations by consenting to them or making a promise.  Of course, most  citizens never explicitly promise or consent to obey the laws; for this  reason, proponents of this argument attempt to infer consent from such  considerations as continued residence and acceptance of benefits from the  state.  Nevertheless, acceptance of benefits one cannot decline no more  implies consent to obey law than it does duties of fair play or gratitude.   Moreover, the prohibitive difficulties associated with emigration preclude  an inference of consent from continued residence.
Finally, the argument from general utility grounds the duty to obey the  law in the consequences of universal disobedience.  Since, according to  this argument, the consequences of general disobedience would be  catastrophic, it is wrong for any individual to disobey the law; for no  person may disobey the law unless everyone may do so.  In response, Smith  points out that this strategy of argument leads to absurdities: “We will  have to maintain, for example, that there is a prima facie obligation not  to eat dinner at five o’clock, for if everyone did so, certain essential  services could not be maintained” (Smith 1973, p. 966).
 c.  The Justification of Punishment
Punishment is unique among putatively legitimate acts in that its point  is to inflict discomfort on the recipient; an act that is incapable of  causing a person minimal discomfort cannot be characterized as a  punishment.  In most contexts, the commission of an act for the purpose of  inflicting discomfort is morally problematic because of its resemblance to  torture.  For this reason, institutional punishment requires a moral  justification sufficient to distinguish it from other practices of  purposely inflicting discomfort on other people.
Justifications for punishment typically take five forms: (1)  retributive; (2) deterrence; (3) preventive; (4) rehabilitative; and (5)  restitutionary.  According to the retributive justification, what justifies  punishing a person is that she committed an offense that deserves the  punishment.  On this view, it is morally appropriate that a person who has  committed a wrongful act should suffer in proportion to the magnitude of  her wrongdoing.  The problem, however, is that the mere fact that someone  is deserving of punishment does not imply it is morally permissible for the  state to administer punishment; it would be wrong for me, for example, to  punish someone else’s child even though her behavior might deserve it.
In contrast to the retributivist theories that look back to a person’s  prior wrongful act as justification for punishment, utilitarian theories  look forward to the beneficial consequences of punishing a person.  There  are three main lines of utilitarian reasoning.  According to the deterrence  justification, punishment of a wrongdoer is justified by the socially  beneficial effects that it has on other persons.  On this view, punishment  deters wrongdoing by persons who would otherwise commit wrongful acts.  The  problem with the deterrence theory is that it justifies punishment of one  person on the strength of the effects that it has on other persons.  The  idea that it is permissible to deliberately inflict discomfort on one  person because doing so may have beneficial effects on the behavior of  other persons appears inconsistent with the Kantian principle that it is  wrong to use people as mere means.
The preventive justification argues that incarcerating a person for  wrongful acts is justified insofar as it prevents that person from  committing wrongful acts against society during the period of  incarceration.  The rehabilitative justification argues that punishment is  justified in virtue of the effect that it has on the moral character of the  offender.  Each of these justifications suffers from the same flaw:  prevention of crime and rehabilitation of the offender can be achieved  without the deliberate infliction of discomfort that constitutes  punishment.  For example, prevention of crime might require detaining the  offender, but it does not require detention in an environment that is as  unpleasant as those typically found in prisons.
The restitutionary justification focuses on the effect of the  offender’s wrongful act on the victim.  Other theories of punishment  conceptualize the wrongful act as an offense against society; the  restitutionary theory sees wrongdoing as an offense against the victim.   Thus, on this view, the principal purpose of punishment must be to make the  victim whole to the extent that this can be done: “The point is not that  the offender deserves to suffer; it is rather that the offended party  desires compensation” (Barnett 1977, p. 289).  Accordingly, a criminal  convicted of wrongdoing should be sentenced to compensate her victim in  proportion to the victim’s loss.  The problem with the restitutionary  theory is that it fails to distinguish between compensation and punishment.   Compensatory objectives focus on the victim, while punitive objectives  focus on the offender.
 3. Critical Theories of Law
 a. Legal Realism
The legal realist movement was inspired by John Chipman Gray and Oliver  Wendall Holmes and reached its apex in the 1920s and 30s through the work  of Karl Llewellyn, Jerome Frank, and Felix Cohen.  The realists eschewed  the conceptual approach of the positivists and naturalists in favor of an  empirical analysis that sought to show how practicing judges really decide cases (see Leiter 1998).  The realists were deeply skeptical of the  ascendant notion that judicial legislation is a rarity.  While not entirely  rejecting the idea that judges can be constrained by rules, the realists  maintained that judges create new law through the exercise of lawmaking  discretion considerably more often than is commonly supposed.  On their  view, judicial decision is guided far more frequently by political and  moral intuitions about the facts of the case (instead of by legal rules)  than theories like positivism and naturalism acknowledge.
As an historical matter, legal realism arose in response to legal  formalism, a particular model of legal reasoning that assimilates legal  reasoning to syllogistic reasoning.  According to the formalist model, the  legal outcome (that is, the holding) logically follows from the legal rule  (major premise) and a statement of the relevant facts (minor premise).   Realists believe that formalism understates judicial lawmaking abilities  insofar as it represents legal outcomes as entailed syllogistically  by applicable rules and facts.  For if legal outcomes are logically implied  by propositions that bind judges, it follows that judges lack legal  authority to reach conflicting outcomes.
Legal realism can roughly be characterized by the following claims:

the class of available legal materials is insufficient to logically entail      a unique legal outcome in most cases worth litigating at the appellate      level (the Local Indeterminacy Thesis);
 in such cases, judges make new      law in deciding legal disputes through the exercise of a lawmaking      discretion (the Discretion Thesis); and
judicial decisions in      indeterminate cases are influenced by the judge’s political and moral      convictions, not by legal considerations.

Though (3) is logically    independent of (1) and (2), (1) seems to imply (2): insofar as judges    decide legally indeterminate cases, they must be creating new law.
It is worth noting the relations between legal realism, formalism, and  positivism.  While formalism is often thought to be entailed by positivism,  it turns out that legal realism is not only consistent with positivism, but  also presupposes the truth of all three of positivism’s core theses.   Indeed, the realist acknowledges that law is essentially the product of  official activity, but believes that judicial lawmaking occurs more  frequently than is commonly assumed.  But the idea that law is essentially  the product of official activity presupposes the truth of positivism’s  Conventionality, Social Fact, and Separability theses.  Though the  preoccupations of the realists were empirical (that is, attempting to identify  the psychological and sociological factors influencing judicial  decision-making), their implicit conceptual commitments were decidedly  positivistic in flavor.
 b. Critical Legal Studies
The critical legal studies (CLS) movement attempts to expand the  radical aspects of legal realism into a Marxist critique of mainstream  liberal jurisprudence.  CLS theorists believe the realists understate the  extent of indeterminacy; whereas the realists believe that indeterminacy is  local in the sense that it is confined to a certain class of cases, CLS  theorists argue that law is radically (or globally) indeterminate in the  sense that the class of available legal materials rarely, if ever,  logically/causally entails a unique outcome.
CLS theorists emphasize the role of ideology in shaping the content of  the law.  On this view, the content of the law in liberal democracies  necessarily reflects “ideological struggles among social factions in which  competing conceptions of justice, goodness, and social and political life  get compromised, truncated, vitiated, and adjusted” (Altman 1986, p. 221).   The inevitable outcome of such struggles, on this view, is a profound  inconsistency permeating the deepest layers of the law.  It is this  pervasive inconsistency that gives rise to radical indeterminacy in the  law.  For insofar as the law is inconsistent, a judge can justify any of a  number of conflicting outcomes.
At the heart of the CLS critique of liberal jurisprudence is the idea  that radical indeterminacy is inconsistent with liberal conceptions of  legitimacy.  According to these traditional liberal conceptions, the  province of judges is to interpret, and not make, the law.  For, on this  view, democratic ideals imply that lawmaking must be left to legislators  who, unlike appointed judges, are accountable to the electorate.  But if  law is radically indeterminate, then judges nearly always decide cases by  making new law, which is inconsistent with liberal conceptions of the  legitimate sources of lawmaking authority.
 c.  Law and Economics
The law and economics movement argues for the value of economic  analysis in the law both as a description about how courts and legislators  do behave and as a prescription for how such officials should behave.  The  legal economists, led by Richard Posner, argue that the content of many  areas of the common law can be explained in terms of its tendency to  maximize preferences:
[M]any areas of law, especially the great common law fields of  property, torts, crimes, and contracts, bear the stamp of economic  reasoning.  It is not a refutation that few judicial opinions contain  explicit references to economic concepts.  Often the true grounds of  decision are concealed rather than illuminated by the characteristic  rhetoric of judicial opinions.  Indeed, legal education consists primarily  of learning to dig beneath the rhetorical surface to find those grounds,  many of which may turn out to have an economic character (Posner 1992, p.  23).
Posner subscribes to the so-called efficiency theory of the common law,  according to which “the common law is best (not perfectly) explained as a  system for maximizing the wealth of society” (Posner 1992, p. 23).
More influential than Posner’s descriptive claims is his normative view  that law should strive to maximize wealth.  According to Posner, the proper  goal of the statutory and common law is to promote wealth maximization,  which can best be done by facilitating the mechanisms of the free market.   Posner’s normative view combines elements of utilitarian analysis with a  Kantian respect for autonomy.  On the utilitarian side, markets tend to  maximize wealth and the satisfaction of preferences.  In a market  transaction with no third-party effects, wealth is increased because all  parties are made better off by the transaction-otherwise there would be no  incentive to consummate the transaction-and no one is made worse off.
On the Kantian side, the law should facilitate market transactions  because market transactions best reflect autonomous judgments about the  value of individual preferences. At least ideally, individuals express and  realize their preferences through mutually consensual market transactions  consummated from positions of equal bargaining power.  Thus, market  transactions tend, ideally, to be both efficient (because they tend to  maximize wealth without harmful third-party effects) and just (because all  parties are consenting).
 d. Outsider Jurisprudence
So-called “outsider jurisprudence” is concerned with providing an  analysis of the ways in which law is structured to promote the interests of  white males and to exclude females and persons of color.  For example, one  principal objective of feminist jurisprudence is to show how patriarchal  assumptions have shaped the content of laws in a wide variety of areas:  property, contract, criminal law, constitutional law, and the law of civil  rights.  Additionally, feminist scholars challenge traditional ideals of  judicial decision-making according to which judges decide legal disputes by  applying neutral rules in an impartial and objective fashion.  Feminists  have, of course, always questioned whether it is possible for judges to  achieve an objective and impartial perspective, but now question whether  the traditional model is even desirable.
Critical race theory is likewise concerned to point up the way in which  assumptions of white supremacy have shaped the content of the law at the  expense of persons of color.  Additionally, critical race theorists show  how the experience, concerns, values, and perspectives of persons of color  are systematically excluded from mainstream discourse among practicing  lawyers, judges, and legislators.  Finally, such theorists attempt to show  how assumptions about race are built into most liberal theories of law.
 4. References and Further Reading

Andrew Altman (1986), “Legal Realism, Critical Legal Studies, and Dworkin,”        Philosophy and Public Affairs, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 205-236.
 Thomas Aquinas (1988), On Law, Morality and Politics (Indianapolis: Hackett      Publishing Co.).
 John Austin (1977), Lectures on Jurisprudence and the Philosophy of Positive      Law (St. Clair Shores, MI: Scholarly Press.
John Austin (1995), The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (Cambridge: Cambridge      University Press).
 Randy E. Barnett (1977), “Restitution: A New Paradigm of Criminal Justice,”        Ethics, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 279-301.
 Jeremy Bentham (1988), A Fragment of Government (Cambridge: Cambridge      University Press).
Jeremy Bentham (1970), Of Laws In General (London: Athlone Press).
 Brian Bix (1995), “Conceptual Questions and Jurisprudence,” Legal Theory,      vol. 1, no. 4 (December), pp. 465-479.
Brian Bix (1996a), Jurisprudence: Theory and Context (Boulder, CO: Westview      Press).
 Brian Bix (1996b), “Natural Law Theory,” in Dennis M. Patterson (ed.), A Companion to      Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory (Cambridge: Blackwell Publishing      Co.).
 William Blackstone (1979), Commentaries on the Law of England (Chicago: The      University of Chicago Press).
 Jules L. Coleman (1989), “On the Relationship Between Law and Morality,” Ratio      Juris, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 66-78.
 Jules L. Coleman (1982), “Negative and Positive Positivism,” 11 Journal of Legal      Studies vol. 139, no. 1, pp. 139-164.
 Jules L. Coleman (1996), “Authority and Reason,” in Robert P. George, The Autonomy of Law:      Essays on Legal Positivism (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 287-319.
 Jules L. Coleman (1998), “Incorporationism, Conventionality      and The Practical Difference Thesis,” Legal Theory, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 381-426.
 Jules L. Coleman and Jeffrie Murphy (1990), Philosophy of Law (Boulder, CO:      Westview Press).
 Kimberle Crenshaw, Neil Gotanda, Gary Peller, and Kendall Thomas, eds. (1995), Critical Race Theory: The Key Writings That Formed the Movement (New      York: The New Press).
 Patrick Devlin (1965), The Enforcement of Morals (Oxford: Oxford University      Press).
 Gerald Dworkin (1972), “Paternalism,” The Monist, vol. 56, pp. 64-84.
 Ronald Dworkin (1978), Taking Rights Seriously (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Ronald Dworkin (1982), “‘Natural’ Law Revisited,” University of Florida Law Review vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 165-188.
Ronald Dworkin (1986), Law’s Empire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
 Joel Feinberg (1985), Offense to Others (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
 Joel Feinberg (1979), “Civil Disobedience in the Modern World,” Humanities in      Review, vol. 2, pp. 37-60.
 John Finnis (1980), Natural Law and Natural Rights (Oxford: Clarendon      Press).
 William Fisher, Morton Horovitz, and Thomas Reed, eds. (1993), American Legal      Realism (New York: Oxford University Press).
 Jerome Frank (1930), Law and the Modern Mind (New York: Brentano’s      Publishing).
 Lon L. Fuller (1964), The Morality of Law (New Haven, CT: Yale University      Press).
 Lon L. Fuller (1958), “Positivism and Fidelity to Law,” Harvard Law Review, vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 630-672 .
 Klaus Füßer (1996), “Farewell to ‘Legal Positivism’: The Separation Thesis      Unravelling,” in Robert P. George, The Autonomy of Law: Essays on Legal        Positivism (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 119-162.
 John Chipman Gray (1921), The Nature and Source of Law (New York:      Macmillan).
 Kent Greenawalt (1987), Conflicts of Law and Morality (Oxford: Clarendon      Press).
 H.L.A. Hart (1994), The Concept of Law, 2nd Edition (Oxford: Oxford      University Press).
H.L.A. Hart (1983), Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon      Press).
H.L.A. Hart (1963), Law, Liberty and Morality (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
 Kenneth Einar Himma (1998), “Positivism, Naturalism, and the Obligation to Obey      Law,” Southern Journal of Philosophy, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 145-161.
 Oliver Wendall Holmes (1898), “The Path of the Law,” Harvard Law Review, vol. 110, no. 5, pp. 991-1009 .
 Brian Leiter (1998), “Naturalism and Naturalized Jurisprudence,” in Brian Bix      (ed.), Analyzing Law: New Essays in Legal Theory (Oxford: Clarendon      Press).
 Brian Leiter, “Legal Realism,” in Dennis M. Patterson, ed. (1996), A Companion to      Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers).
 John Stuart Mill (1906), On Liberty (New York: Alfred A. Knopf).
 Michael Moore (1992), “Law as a Functional Kind,” in Robert P. George (ed.), Natural Law Theories: Contemporary Essays (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
 Michael Moore, “The Moral Worth of Retribution,” in Ferdinand Schoeman, ed. (1987), Responsibility, Character, and the Emotions (Cambridge: Cambridge      University Press).
 Richard Posner (1992), Economic Analysis of Law, 4th Edition (Boston:      Little, Brown, and Company).
 John Rawls (1964), “Legal Obligation and the Duty of Fair Play,” in Sidney Hook      (ed.), Law and Philosophy (New York: New York University Press), pp. 3-18.
 Joseph Raz (1979), The Authority of Law: Essays on Law and Morality (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Joseph Raz (1980), The Concept of a Legal System: An Introduction to the Theory of      Legal Systems, Second Edition (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
 Roger Shiner (1992), Norm and Nature (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
 M.B.E. Smith (1973), “Do We have a Prima Facie Obligation to Obey the Law,” 82 Yale Law Journal 950-976.
 Patricia Smith, ed. (1993), Feminist Jurisprudence (Oxford: Oxford      University Press).
 C.L. Ten (1987), Crime, Guilt, and Punishment (Oxford: Oxford University      Press).
 W.J. Waluchow (1994), Inclusive Legal Positivism (Oxford: Clarendon Press).

Author Information
Kenneth Einar Himma
Email: himma@spu.edu
Seattle Pacific University
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







