








al-Kirmani, Hamid al-Din | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani (d. 1020)
Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani was a prominent Ismaili missionary during the reign of the Fatimid caliph-imam al-Hakim (996-1021). He was of Persian origin and was probably born in the province of Kirman. He seems to have spent the greater part of his life as a Fatimid da‘i (missionary) in Iraq (in Baghdad and Basra) and in central and western parts of Iran.Al-Kirmani was part of the official Fatimid campaign against the dissident da‘is, who had also proclaimed al-Hakim’s divinity. In Cairo he produced several works in refutation of the Druze movement and religion. Subsequently, al-Kirmani returned to Iraq where he completed his last and magnum opus, Rahat al-‘aql.
A prolific writer, al-Kirmani was one of the most learned Ismaili theologians of the Fatimid times. He was well-acquainted with the Hebrew text of the Old Testament, the Syriac version of the New Testament, and the post-Biblical Jewish writings. He expounded the Ismaili Shi‘i doctrine of the imamate in numerous writings. In a few treatises, al-Kirmani refuted the theological views of the Zaydis, the Twelver Shi‘is, and other Muslim opponents of the Fatimid Ismaili imams. Al-Kirmani was also an accomplished philosopher belonging to that select group of Ismaili da‘is of the Iranian lands who amalgamated in an original manner their Ismaili theology with different philosophical traditions, notably a type of Neoplatonism then current in the Muslim world.
Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani was a prominent Ismaili da‘i or missionary and one of the most learned Ismaili theologians     and philosophers of the Fatimid period. As in the case of other prominent missionaries who observed strict secrecy in their     activities in the midst of hostile milieus, few biographical details are available on al-Kirmani, who flourished during the reign     of the Fatimid caliph-imam al-Hakim (996-1021). Al-Kirmani is not mentioned in any contemporary Muslim historical sources, but     highlights of his life and career can be gathered from his own numerous extant works as well as the writings of the later     Musta‘li-Tayyibi Ismaili authors of Yaman.
Al-Kirmani’s date of birth remains unknown, but he was of Persian origin and was probably born in the province of Kirman.     He seems to have spent the greater part of his life as a Fatimid da‘i in Iraq, having been particularly active in     Baghdad and Basra. In Iraq, al-Kirmani successfully concentrated his efforts on local rulers and influential tribal chiefs, with     whose support the Ismailis aimed to bring about the downfall of the ‘Abbasids. Alarmed by the successes of the Fatimid     da‘wa or mission in Iraq, the ‘Abbasid caliph al-Qadir took retaliatory measures. In 1011, he sponsored the     so-called Baghdad manifesto to discredit the Fatimids, also refuting their ‘Alid ancestry. The honorific title hujjat     al-Iraqayn, meaning the hujja or chief da‘i of both Iraqs (al-Iraq al-Arabi and al-Iraq al-Ajami), which     is often added to al-Kirmani’s name and may be of a late origin, implies that he was also active in central and western parts of     Iran.
Al-Kirmani rose to prominence during the reign of al-Hakim, when the central headquarters of the Fatimid     da‘wa in Cairo considered him as the most learned Ismaili theologian of the time. It was in that capacity that     al-Kirmani played an important role in refuting the extremist ideas of some dissident da‘is, who were then founding     what was to become known as the Druze movement and religion. As part of the official Fatimid campaign against the dissident     da‘is, who had also proclaimed al-Hakim’s divinity, al-Kirmani was summoned in 1014 or shortly earlier to Cairo where     he produced several works in refutation of the extremist doctrines. Al-Kirmani’s writings, which were widely circulated, were to     some extent successful in checking the spread of the extremist doctrines associated with the initiation of the Druze movement.     Subsequently, al-Kirmani returned to Iraq where he completed his last and magnum opus, Rahat al-‘aql, in 1020     and where he died soon afterwards.
A prolific writer, al-Kirmani was one of the most learned Ismaili theologians of the Fatimid times. He was     well-acquainted with the Hebrew text of the Old Testament, the Syriac version of the New Testament, and the post-Biblical Jewish     writings. He expounded the Ismaili Shi‘i doctrine of the imamate in numerous writings. In a few treatises, al-Kirmani     refuted the theological views of the Zaydis, the Twelver Shi‘is, and other Muslim opponents of the Fatimid Ismaili imams. In     his al-Aqwal al-dhahabiya, al-Kirmani refuted the ideas of Abu Bakr Mohammad b. Zakariya al-Razi (d. 934), who had argued     for the necessity of revelation and prophethood while tracing all sciences to revelational origins.   Al-Kirmani was also an accomplished philosopher belonging to that select group of Ismaili da‘is of the     Iranian lands who amalgamated in an original manner their Ismaili theology (kalam) with different philosophical     traditions, notably a type of Neoplatonism then current in the Muslim world. As a philosopher, al-Kirmani was fully acquainted     with Aristotelian and Neoplatonic philosophies as well as the metaphysical systems of the Muslim philosophers (falasifa),     notably al-Farabi, and Ibn Sina (Avicenna) who was his contemporary. In his Kitab al-riyad, al-Kirmani acted as an arbiter     in a philosophical debate that had taken place earlier among some Iranian da‘is, notably Muhammad al-Nasafi, Abu     YaRahat al-‘aql, which is written for the advanced adepts. In this book, al-Kirmani also propounded what may     be regarded as the third stage in the development of Ismaili cosmology in medieval times. Al-Kirmani replaced the Neoplatonic     dyad of the Intellect (‘aql) and Soul (nafs) in the spiritual world, which had been adopted by his Iranian     Ismaili predecessors, by a series of ten separate Intellects in partial adaptation of al-Farabi’s Aristotelian cosmic system.     Al-Kirmani’s cosmology, representing an original synthesis of different philosophical traditions, was not however adopted by the     Fatimid Ismailis; it later provided the basis for the development of the fourth and final stage of Ismaili cosmology at the hands     of the Musta‘li-Tayyibi scholars in Yaman.
References and Further Reading

W. Ivanow, Ismaili     Literature: A Bibliographical Survey, Tehran, 1963, pp. 40-45.  Contains  a survey of al-Kirmani’s known works and their manuscripts, preserved mainly in Yaman and India.
I. K. Poonawala, Biobibliography of Ismaili Literature Malibu, Calif., 1977, pp. 94-102.  Also contains  a survey of al-Kirmani’s known works and their manuscripts, preserved mainly in Yaman and India.
J. van Ess, “Bibliographische     Notizen zur islamischen Theologie. I. Zur Chronologie der Werke des Hamidaddin al-Kirmani”, Die Welt des Orients, 9, 1978,     pp. 255-261. A partial chronology of al-Kirmani’s works.
W. Madelung, “Das     Imamat in der frühen ismailitischen Lehre”, Der Islam, 37, 1961, pp. 114-127.
H. Corbin, Cyclical Time and Ismaili     Gnosis, London, 1983, index.
F. Daftary, The Ismailis: Their History and Doctrines, Cambridge, 1990, pp. 113, 192-193,     196-197, 218, 227, 229-230, 235-236, 240, 245-246, 287, 291, 298.
Paul E. Walker, Early Philosophical Shiism, Cambridge,     1993, index.
Paul. E. Walker, Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani: Ismaili Thought in the Age of al-Hakim, London, 1999.
Daniel De     Smet, La Quiétude de l’intellect: Néoplatonisme et gnose ismaélienne dans l’oeuvre de Hamid ad-Din al-Kirmani, Louvain,     1995.

Author Information
Farhad Daftary
Email: info@iis.ac.uk
The Institute of Ismaili Studies
United Kingdom





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







