








Hegel: Social and Political Thought | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Hegel: Social and Political Thought
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831) is one of the greatest systematic thinkers in  the history of Western philosophy.   In addition to epitomizing German idealist  philosophy, Hegel boldly claimed that his own system of philosophy represented an  historical culmination of all previous philosophical thought.  Hegel’s overall  encyclopedic system is divided into the science of Logic, the philosophy of  Nature, and the philosophy of Spirit.  Of most enduring interest are his views on  history, society, and the state, which fall within the realm of Objective Spirit.  Some have considered Hegel to be a nationalistic apologist for the Prussian  State of the early 19th century, but his significance has been much  broader, and there is no doubt that Hegel himself considered his work to be an  expression of the self-consciousness of the World Spirit of his time.  At the  core of Hegel’s social and political thought are the concepts of freedom, reason,  self-consciousness, and recognition.  There are important connections between the  metaphysical or speculative articulation of these ideas and their application to  social and political reality, and one could say that the full meaning of these  ideas can be grasped only with a comprehension of their social and historical  embodiment.  The work that explicates this concretizing of ideas, and which has  perhaps stimulated as much controversy as interest, is the Philosophy  of Right (Philosophie des Rechts), which will be a main focus of this  essay.
Table of Contents

 Biography 
 Political Writings 
 The Jena Writings (1802-06) 
 The Phenomenology of Spirit 
 Logic and Political Theory 
 The Philosophy of Right 

 Abstract Right 
 Morality 
 Ethical Life 

 The Family 
 Civil Society 
 The State 

Constitutional Law 
 International Law 
 World History 






 Closing Remarks 
References and Further Reading

 Works by Hegel in German and in English Translation 
 Works on Hegel’s Social and Political Philosophy



 1. Biography
G.W.F. Hegel was born in Stuttgart in 1770, the son of an official in the  government of the Duke of Württemberg.   He was educated at the Royal  Highschool in Stuttgart from 1777-88 and steeped in both the classics and the  literature of the European Enlightenment.  In October, 1788 Hegel began studies  at a theological seminary in Tübingen, the Tüberger Stift, where he  became friends with the poet Hölderlin and philosopher Friedrich Schelling,  both of whom would later become famous.  In 1790 Hegel received an M.A. degree,  one year after the fall of the Bastille in France, an event welcomed by these  young idealistic students.  Shortly after graduation, Hegel took a post as tutor  to a wealthy Swiss family in Berne from 1793-96.  In 1797, with the help of his  friend Hölderlin, Hegel moved to Frankfurt to take on another tutorship.  During this time he wrote unpublished essays on religion which display a certain  radical tendency of thought in his critique of orthodox religion.
In January 1801, two years after the death of his father, Hegel finished with  tutoring and went to Jena where he took a position as Privatdozent (unsalaried lecturer) at the University of Jena, where Hegel’s friend Schelling  had already held a university professorship for three years.  There Hegel  collaborated with Schelling on a Critical Journal of Philosophy (Kritisches Journal der Philosophie) and he also published a piece on the  differences between the philosophies of Fichte and Schelling (Differenz des  Fichte’schen und Schelling’schen Systems der Philosophie) in which preference  was consistently expressed for the latter thinker.  After having attained a  professorship in 1805, Hegel published his first major work, the Phenomenology  of Spirit (Phänomenologie des Geistes, 1807) which was delivered to  the publisher just at the time of the occupation of Jena by Napoleon’s armies.  With the closing of the University, due to the victory of the French in Prussia,  Hegel had to seek employment elsewhere and so he took a job as editor of a  newspaper in Bamberg, Bavaria in 1807 (Die Bamberger Zeitung) followed by  a move to Nuremberg in 1808 where Hegel became headmaster of a preparatory school  (Gymnasium), roughly equivalent to a high school, and also taught  philosophy to the students there until 1816.  During this time Hegel married, had  children, and published his Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik) in  three volumes.
One year following the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo (1815), Hegel took the  position of Professor of Philosophy at the University of Heidelberg where he  published his first edition of the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences  in Outline (Encyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im  Grundrisse, 1817).  In 1818 he became Professor of Philosophy at the  University of Berlin, through the invitation of the Prussion minister von  Altenstein (who had introduced many liberal reforms in Prussia until the fall of  Napoleon), and Hegel taught there until he died in 1831.  Hegel lectured on  various topics in philosophy, most notably on history, art, religion, and the  history of philosophy and he became quite famous and influential.  He held public  positions as a member of the Royal Examination Commission of the Province of  Brandenberg and also as a councellor in the Ministry of Education.  In 1821 he  published the Philosophy of Right (Philosophie des Rechts) and in  1830 was given the honor of being elected Rector of the University.   On November  14, 1831 Hegel died of cholera in Berlin, four months after having been decorated  by Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia.
 2. Political Writings
Apart from his philosophical works on history, society, and the state, Hegel  wrote several political tracts most of which were not published in his lifetime  but which are significant enough in connection to the theoretical writings to  deserve some mention.  (These are published in English translation in Hegel’s  Political Writings and Political Writings, listed in the bibliography  of works by Hegel below.)
Hegel’s very first political work was on “On the Recent Domestic  Affairs of Wurtemberg” (Über die neuesten innern Verhältnisse  Württembergs…, 1798) which was neither completed nor published.  In  it Hegel expresses the view that the constitutional structure of Wurtemberg  requires fundamental reform.  He condemns the absolutist rule of Duke Ferdinand  along with the narrow traditionalism and legal positivism of his officials and  welcomes the convening of the Estates Assembly, while disagreeing with the method  of election in the Diet.  In contrast to the existing system of oligarchic  privilege, Hegel argues that the Diet needs to be based on popular election  through local town councils, although this should not be done by granting  suffrage to an uneducated multitude.  The essay ends inconclusively on the  appropriate method of political representation.
A quite long piece of about 100 pages, The German Constitution (Die  Verfassung Deutchlands) was written and revised by Hegel between 1799 and  1802 and was not published until after his death in 1893.  This piece provides an  analysis and critique of the constitution of the German Empire with the main  theme being that the Empire is a thing of the past and that appeals for a unified  German state are anachronistic.  Hegel finds a certain hypocrisy in German  thinking about the Empire and a gap between theory and practice in the German  constitution.  Germany was no longer a state governed by law but rather a  plurality of independent political entities with disparate practices.  Hegel  stresses the need to recognize that the realities of the modern state necessitate  a strong public authority along with a populace that is free and unregimented.  The principle of government in the modern world is constitutional monarchy, the  potentialities of which can be seen in Austria and Prussia.  Hegel ends the essay  on an uncertain note with the idea that Germany as a whole could be saved only  by some Machiavellian genius.
The essay “Proceedings of the Estates Assembly in the Kingdom of  Württemberg, 1815-1816” was published in 1817 in the Heidelbergische  Jahrbücher.  In it Hegel commented on sections of the official report of  the Diet of Württemberg, focusing on the opposition by the Estates to the  King’s request for ratification of a new constitutional charter that recognized  recent liberalizing changes and reforms. Hegel sided with King Frederick and  criticized the Estates as being reactionary in their appeal to old customary laws  and feudal property rights.  There has been controversy over whether Hegel here  was trying to gain favor with the King in order to attain a government position.   However, Hegel’s favoring a sovereign kingdom of Wurtemberg over the  German Empire and the need for a constitutional charter that is more rational  than the previous are quite continuous with the previous essays.  A genuine state  needs a strong and effective central public authority, and in resisting the  Estates are trying to live in the feudal past.  Moreover, Hegel is not uncritical  of the King’s constitutional provisions and finds deficiencies in the exclusion  of members of professions from the Estates Assembly as well as in the proposal  for direct suffrage in representation, which treats citizens like unintegrated  atomic units rather than as members of a political community.
The last of Hegel’s political tracts, “The English Reform Bill,” was written  in installments in 1831 for the ministerial newspaper, the Preussische  Staatszeitung, but was interrupted due to censure by the Prussian King  because of the perception of its being overly critical and anti-English.  As a  result, the remainder of the work was printed independently and distributed  discretely.  Hegel’s main line of criticism is that the proposed English reforms  of suffrage will not make much of a difference in the distribution of political  power and may only create a power struggle between the rising group of  politicians and the traditional ruling class.  Moreover, there are deep problems  in English society that cannot be addressed by the proposed electoral reforms,  including political corruption in the English burroughs, the selling of seats in  parliament, and the general oligarchic nature of social reality including the  wide disparities between wealth and poverty, Ecclesiastical patronage, and conditions  in Ireland.  While Hegel supports the idea of reform with its appeal to rational  change as against the “positivity” of customary law, traditionalism and  privilege, he thinks that universalizing suffrage with a property qualification  without a thorough reform of the system of Common Law and the existing social  conditions will only be perceived as token measures leading to greater  disenchantment among the newly enfranchised and possibly inclinations to violent  revolution.  Hegel claims that national pride keeps the English from studying and  following the reforms of the European Continent or seriously reflecting upon and  grasping the nature of government and legislation.
There are several overall themes that reoccur in these political writings and  that connect with some of the main lines of thought in Hegel’s theoretical works.   First, there is the contrast between the attitude of legal positivism and the  appeal to the law of reason.  Hegel consistently displays a “political  rationalism” which attacks old concepts and attitudes that no longer apply to the  modern world.  Old constitutions stemming from the Feudal era are a confused  mixture of customary laws and special privileges that must give way to the  constitutional reforms of the new social and political world that has arrived in  the aftermath of the French Revolution.  Second, reforms of old constitutions  must be thorough and radical, but also cautious and gradual.  This might sound  somewhat inconsistent, but for Hegel a reform is radical due to a fundamental  change in direction, not the speed of such change.  Hegel suggests that customary  institutions not be abolished too quickly for there must be some congruence and  continuity with the existing social conditions.  Hegel rejects violent popular  action and sees the principal force for reform in governments and the estates  assemblies, and he thinks reforms should always stress legal equality and the  public welfare.  Third, Hegel emphasizes the need for a strong central  government, albeit without complete centralized control of public administration  and social relations.  Hegel here anticipates his later conception of civil  society (bürgerliche Gesellschaft), the social realm of individual  autonomy where there is significant local self-governance.  The task of  government is not to thoroughly bureaucratize civil society but rather to provide  oversight, regulation, and when necessary intervention.  Fourth, Hegel claims  that representation of the people must be popular but not atomistic.  The  democratic element in a state is not its sole feature and it must be  institutionalized in a rational manner.  Hegel rejects universal suffrage as  irrational because it provides no means of mediation between the individual and  the state as a whole.  Hegel believed that the masses lacked the experience and  political education to be directly involved in national elections and policy  matters and that direct suffrage leads to electoral indifference and apathy.  Fifth, while acknowledging the importance of a division of powers in the public  authority, Hegel does not appeal to a conception of separation and balance of  powers.  He views the estates assemblies, which safeguard freedom, as essentially  related to the monarch and also stresses the role of civil servants and members  of the professions, both in ministerial positions and in the assemblies.  The  monarchy, however, is the central supporting element in the constitutional  structure because the monarch is invested with the sovereignty of the state.  However, the power of the monarch is not despotical for he exercises authority  through universal laws and statutes and is advised and assisted by a ministry and  civil service, all members of which must meet educational requirements.
 3. The Jena Writings (1802-06)
Hegel wrote several pieces while at the University of Jena that point in the  direction of some of the main theses of the Philosophy of Right.  The  first was entitled “On the Scientific Modes of Treatment of Natural Law–Its  Place in Practical Philosophy and Its Relationship to the Positive Science of  Law” (Über die wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des  Naturrechts…), published originally in the Kritisches Journal der  Philosophie in 1802, edited jointly by Hegel and Schelling.  In this piece,  usually referred to as the essay on Natural Law, Hegel criticizes both the  empirical and formal approaches to natural law, as exemplified in British and  Kantian philosophy respectively.  Empiricism reaches conclusions that are limited  by the particularities of its contexts and materials and thus cannot provide  universally valid propositions regarding the concepts of various social and  political institutions or of the relation of reflective consciousness to social  and political experience.  Formalist conclusions, on the other hand, are too  insubstantial and abstract in failing to properly link human reason concretely to  human experience.  Traditional natural law theories are based on an abstract  rationalism and the attempts of Rousseau, Kant, and Fichte to remedy this through  their various ethical conceptions fail to overcome abstractness.  For Hegel, the  proper method of philosophical science must link concretely the development of  the human mind and its rational powers to actual experience.  Moreover, the  concept of a social and political community must transcend the instrumentalizing  of the state.
Hegel’s work entitled “The System of Ethical Life” (System der  Sittlichkeit) was written in 1802-03 and first published in its entirety by  Georg Lasson in 1913 in a volume entitled Schriften zur Politik und  Rechtsphilosophie.  In this work, Hegel develops a philosophical theory of  social and political development that correlates with the self-development of  essential human powers.  Historically, humans begin in an immediate relation to  nature and their social existence takes the form of natürliche  Sittlichkeit, i.e., a non-selfconscious relation to nature and to others.  However, the satisfaction of human desires leads to their reproduction and  multiplication and leads to the necessity for labor, which induces transformation  in the human world and people’s connections to it.  This process leads to a  self-realization that undermines the original naïve unity with nature and  others and to the formation of overtly cooperative endeavors, e.g., in the making  and use of tools.  Another result of labor is the emergence of private property  as an embodiment of human personality as well as of sets of legal relationships  that institutionalize property ownership, exchange, etc., and deal with crimes  against property.  Furthermore, disparities in property and power lead to  relationships of subordination and the use of the labor of others to satisfy  one’s increasingly complex and expanded desires.  Gradually, a system of mutual  dependence, a “system of needs,” develops, and along with the increasing  division of labor there also develops class differentiations reflecting the types  of labor or activity taken up by members of each class, which Hegel classifies  into the agricultural, acquisitive, and administerial classes.  However, despite  relations of interdependence and cooperation the members of society experience  social connections as a sort of blind fate without some larger system of control  which is provided by the state which regulates the economic life of society.  The  details of the structure of the state are unclear in this essay, but what is  clear is that for Hegel the state provides an increased rationality to social  practices, much in the sense that the later German sociologist Max Weber  (1864-1920) would articulate how social practices become more rational by  being codified and made more predictable.
The manuscripts entitled Realphilosophie are based on lectures Hegel  delivered at Jena University in 1803-04 (Realphilosophie I) and 1805-06  (Realphilosophie II), and were originally published by Johannes  Hoffmeister in 1932.  These writings cover much of the same ground as the  System der Sittlichkeit in explicating a philosophy of mind and human  experience in relation to human social and political development.  Some of the  noteworthy ideas in these writings are the role and significance of language for  social consciousness, for giving expression to a people (Volk) and for the  comprehending of and mastery of the world, and the necessity and consequences of  the fragmentation of primordial social relationships and patterns as part of the  process of human development.  Also, there is a reiteration of the importance of  property relations as crucial to social recognition and how there would be no  security of property or recognition of property rights if society were to remain  a mere multitude of families.  Such security requires a system of control over  the “struggle for recognition” through interpersonal norms, rules, and juridical  authority provided by the nation state.  Moreover, Hegel repeats the need for  strong state regulation of the economy, which if left to its own workings is  blind to the needs of the social community.  The economy, especially through the  division of labor, produces fragmentation and diminishment of human life (compare  Marx on alienation) and the state must not only address this phenomenon but also  provide the means for the people’s political participation to further the  development of social self-consciousness.  In all of this Hegel appears to be  providing a philosophical account of modern developments both in terms of the  tensions and conflicts that are new to modernity as well as in the progressive  movements of reform found under the influence of Napoleon.
Finally, Hegel also discusses the forms of government, the three main types  being tyranny, democracy, and hereditary monarchy.  Tyranny is found typically in  primitive or undeveloped states, democracy exists in states where there is the  realization of individual identity but no split between the public and private  person, and hereditary monarchy is the appropriate form of political authority in  the modern world in providing strong central government along with a system of  indirect representation through Estates.   The relation of religion to the state  is undeveloped in these writings, but Hegel is clear about the supereminent role  of the state that stands above all else in giving expression to the Spirit  (Geist) of a society in a sort of earthly kingdom of God, the realization  of God in the world.  True religion complements and supports this realization and  thus cannot properly have supremacy over or be opposed to the state.
 4. The Phenomenology of Spirit
The Phenomenology of Spirit (Die Phänomenologie des  Geistes), published in 1807, is Hegel’s first major comprehensive  philosophical work.  Originally intended to be the first part of his  comprehensive system of science (Wissenschaft) or philosophy, Hegel  eventually considered it to be the introduction to his system.  This work  provides what can be called a “biography of spirit,” i.e., an account of the  development of consciousness and self-consciousness in the context of some  central epistemological, anthropological and cultural themes of human history.  It has continuity with the works discussed above in examining the development of  the human mind in relation to human experience but is more wide-ranging in also  addressing fundamental questions about the meaning of perceiving, knowing, and  other cognitive activities as well as of the nature of reason and reality. Given  the focus of this essay, the themes of the Phenomenology to be  discussed here are those directly relevant to Hegel’s social and political  thought.
One of the most widely discussed places in the Phenomenology is the  chapter on “The Truth of Self-Certainty” which includes a subsection on  “Independence and Dependence of Self-Consciousness: Lordship and Bondage.”  This  section treats of the (somewhat misleadingly named) “master/slave” struggle which  is taken by some, especially the Marxian-inspired, as a paradigm of all forms of  social conflict, in particular the struggle between social classes.  It is clear  that Hegel intended the scenario to typify certain features of the struggle for  recognition (Anerkennung) overall, be it social, personal, etc.  The  conflict between master and slave (which shall be referred to hereafter as lord and  bondsman as more in keeping with Hegel’s own terminology and the intended generic  meaning) is one in which the historical themes of dominance and obedience,  dependence and independence, etc., are philosophically introduced.  Although this  specific dialectic of struggle occurs only at the earliest stages of  self-consciousness, it nonetheless sets up the main problematic for achieving  realized self-consciousness–the gaining of self-recognition through the  recognition of and by another, through mutual recognition.
According to Hegel, the relationship between self and otherness is the  fundamental defining characteristic of human awareness and activity, being rooted  as it is in the emotion of desire for objects as well as in the estrangement from  those objects, which is part of the primordial human experience of the world. The  otherness that consciousness experiences as a barrier to its goal is the external  reality of the natural and social world, which prevents individual consciousness  from becoming free and independent.  However, that otherness cannot be abolished  or destroyed, without destroying oneself, and so ideally there must be  reconciliation between self and other such that consciousness can “universalize”  itself through the other.  In the relation of dominance and subservience between  two consciousnesses, say lord and bondsman, the basic problem for consciousness  is the overcoming of its otherness, or put positively, the achieving of  integration with itself.  The relation between lord and bondsman leads to a sort  of provisional, incomplete resolution of the struggle for recognition between  distinct consciousnesses.
Hegel asks us to consider how a struggle between two distinct consciousnesses,  let us say a violent “life-or-death” struggle, would lead to one consciousness  surrendering and submitting to the other out of fear of death.  Initially, the  consciousness that becomes lord or master proves its freedom through willingness  to risk its life and not submit to the other out of fear of death, and thus not  identify simply with its desire for life and physical being.  Moreover, this  consciousness is given acknowledgement of its freedom through the submission and  dependence of the other, which turns out paradoxically to be a deficient  recognition in that the dominant one fails to see a reflection of itself in the  subservient one.   Adequate recognition requires a mirroring of the self through  the other, which means that to be successful it must be mutual.  In the ensuing  relationship of lordship and bondage, furthermore, the bondsman through work and  discipline (motivated by fear of dying at the hands of the master or lord)  transforms his subservience into a mastery over his environment, and thus  achieves a measure of independence.  In objectifying himself in his environment  through his labor the bondsman in effect realizes himself, with his transformed  environment serving as a reflection of his inherently self-realizing activity.  Thus, the bondsman gains a measure of independence in his subjugation out of fear  of death.  In a way, the lord represents death as the absolute subjugator, since  it is through fear of this master, of the death that he can impose, that the  bondsman in his acquiescence and subservience is placed into a social context of  work and discipline.  Yet despite, or more properly, because of this subjection  the bondsman is able to attain a measure of independence by internalizing and  overcoming those limitations which must be dealt with if he is to produce  efficiently.  However, this accomplishment, the self-determination of the  bondsman, is limited and incomplete because of the asymmetry that remains in his  relation to the lord.  Self-consciousness is still fragmented, i.e., the  objectification through labor that the bondsman experiences does not coincide  with the consciousness of the lord whose sense of self is not through labor but  through power over the bondsman and enjoyment of the fruits of the bondsman’s  labor.  Only in a realm of ethical life can self-determination be fully  self-conscious to the extent that universal freedom is reflected in the life of  each individual member of society.
Thus, in the Phenomenology consciousness must move on through the  phases of Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness before engaging in  the self-articulation of Reason, and it is not until the section  “Objective  Spirit: The Ethical Order” that the full universalization of self-consciousness  is in principle to be met with.  Here we find a shape of human existence where  all men work freely, serving the needs of the whole community rather than of  masters, and subject only to the “discipline of reason.” This mode of ethical  life, typified in ancient Greek democracy, also eventually disintegrates, as is  expressed in the conflict between human and divine law and the tragic fate that  is the outcome of this conflict illustrated in the story of Antigone.  However,  the ethical life described here is still in its immediacy and is therefore at a  level of abstractness that falls short of the mediation of subjectivity and  universality which is provided spiritually in revealed Christianity and  politically in the modern state, which purportedly provides a solution to human  conflict arising from the struggle for recognition. In any case, the rest of the  Phenomenology is devoted to examinations of culture (including  enlightenment and revolution), morality, religion, and finally, Absolute  Knowing.
The dialectic of self-determination is, for Hegel, inherent in the very  structure of freedom, and is the defining feature of Spirit (Geist).  The  full actualization of Spirit in the human community requires the progressive  development of individuality which effectively begins with the realization in  self-consciousness of the “truth of self-certainty” and culminates in the shape  of a shared common life in an integrated community of love and Reason, based upon  the realization of truths of incarnation, death, resurrection, and forgiveness as  grasped in speculative Religion.  The articulation Hegel provides in the  Phenomenology, however, is very generic and is to be made concrete  politically with the working out of a specific conception of the modern  nation-state with its particular configuration of social and political  institutions.  It is to the latter that we must turn in order to see how these  fundamental dialectical considerations take shape in the “solution” to the  struggle for recognition in self-consciousness.  However, before moving directly  to Hegel’s theory of the state, and history, some discussion of his Logic is in order.
 5. Logic and Political Theory
The Logic constitutes the first part of Hegel’s philosophical system as  presented in his Encyclopedia.  It was preceded by his larger work, The  Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik),  published in 1812-16 in  two volumes.  The “Encyclopedia Logic” is a shorter version intended to function  as part of an “outline,” but it became longer in the course of the three  published versions of 1817, 1827, and 1830.  Also, the English translation by  William Wallace contains additions from the notes of students who heard Hegel’s  lectures on this subject.  (Reference to the paragraphs of the Encyclopedia will be made with the “¶” character.)
The structure of the Logic is triadic, reflecting the organization of  the larger system of philosophy as well as a variety of other motifs, both  internal and external to the Logic proper.  The Logic has three  divisions: the Doctrine of Being, the Doctrine of Essence, and the Doctrine of  the Notion (or Concept).  There are a number of logical categories in this work  that are directly relevant to social and political theorizing.  In the Doctrine  of Being, for example, Hegel explains the concept of “being-for-self” as the  function of self-relatedness in the resolving of opposition between self and  other in the “ideality of the finite” (¶ 95-96). He claims that the task of  philosophy is to bring out the ideality of the finite, and as will be seen later  Hegel’s philosophy of the state is intended to articulate the ideality of the  state, i.e., its affirmative and infinite or rational features.  In the Doctrine  of Essence, Hegel explains the categories of actuality and freedom.  He says that  actuality is the unity of “essence and existence” (¶ 142) and argues that  this does not rule out the actuality of ideas for they become actual by being  realized in external existence.  Hegel will have related points to make about the  actuality of the idea of the state in society and history.  Also, he defines  freedom not in terms of contingency or lack of determination, as is popular, but  rather as the “truth of necessity,” i.e., freedom presupposes necessity in the  sense that reciprocal action and reaction provide a structure for free action,  e.g., a necessary relation between crime and punishment.
The Doctrine of the Notion (Begriff) is perhaps the most relevant  section of the Logic to social and political theory due to its focus on  the various dynamics of development.  This section is subdivided into three  parts: the subjective notion, the objective notion, and the idea which  articulates the unity of subjective and objective.  The first part, the  subjective notion, contains three “moments” or functional parts: universality,  particularity, and individuality (¶ 163ff).  These are particularly  important as Hegel will show how the functional parts of the state operate  according to a progressive “dialectical” movement from the first to the third  moments and how the state as a whole, as a functioning and integrated totality,  gives expression to the concept of  individuality (in ¶198 Hegel refers to  the state as “a system of three syllogisms”).  Hegel treats these relationships  as logical judgments and syllogisms but they do not merely articulate how the  mind must operate (subjectivity) but also explain actual relationships in reality  (objectivity).  In objective reality we find these logical/dialectical  relationships in mechanism, chemism, and teleology.  Finally, in the Idea, the  correspondence of the notion or concept with objective reality, we have the truth of  objects or objects as they ought to be, i.e., as they correspond to their  proper concepts.  The logical articulation of the Idea is very important to  Hegel’s explanation of the Idea of the state in modern history, for this provides  the principles of rationality that guide the development of Spirit in the world  and that become manifested in various ways in social and political life.
 6. The Philosophy of Right
In 1821, Hegel’s Philosophy of Right orginally appeared under the  double title Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaften in Grundrisse; Grundlinien  der Philosophie des Rechts (Natural Law and the Science of the State;  Elements of the Philosophy of Right).  The work was republished by Eduard Gans in  1833 and 1854 as part of Hegel’s Werke, vol. viii and included additions from  notes taken by students at Hegel’s lectures.  The English language translation of  this work by T. M. Knox refers to these later editions as well as to an  edition published in 1923 by Georg Lasson, which included corrections from  previous editions.
The Philosophy of Right constitutes, along with Hegel’s Philosophy of  History, the penultimate section of his Encyclopedia, the section on  Objective Spirit, which deals with the human world and its array of social rules  and institutions, including the moral, legal, religious, economic, and political  as well as marriage, the family, social classes, and other forms of human  organization.  The German word Recht is often translated as ‘law’,  however, Hegel clearly intends the term to have a broader meaning that captures  what we might call the good or just society, one that is “rightful” in its  structure, composition, and practices.
In the Introduction to this work Hegel explains the concept of his  philosophical undertaking along with the specific key concepts of  will, freedom,  and right.   At the very beginning, Hegel states that the Idea of right, the  concept together with its actualization, is the proper subject of the  philosophical science of right (¶ 1).  Hegel is emphatic that the study is  scientific in that it deals in a systematic way with something essentially  rational.  He further remarks that the basis of scientific procedure in a  philosophy of right is explicated in philosophical logic and presupposed by the  former (¶ 2).  Furthermore, Hegel is at pains to distinguish the historical  or legal approach to “positive law” (Gesetz) and the philosophical  approach to the Idea of right (Recht), the former involving mere  description and compilation of laws as legal facts while the latter probes into  the inner meaning and necessary determinations of law or right.  For Hegel the  justification of something, the finding of its inherent rationality, is not a  matter of seeking its origins or longstanding features but rather of studying it  conceptually.
However, there is one sense in which the origin of right is relevant to  philosophical science and this is the free will.  The free will is the basis and  origin of right in the sense that mind or spirit (Geist) generally  objectifies itself in a system of right (human social and political  institutions) that gives expression to freedom, which Hegel says is both the  substance and goal of right (¶ 4).  This ethical life in the state consists  in the unity of the universal and the subjective will. The universal will is  contained in the Idea of freedom as its essence, but when considered apart from  the subjective will can be thought of only abstractly or indeterminately.  Considered apart from the subjective or particular will, the universal will is  “the element of pure indeterminacy or that pure reflection of the ego into  itself which involves  the dissipation of every restriction  and  every content  either immediately presented by nature, by  needs, desires, and impulses, or  given and determined by any means whatever” (¶ 5).  In other words, the  universal will is that moment in the Idea of freedom where willing is thought of  as state of absolutely  unrestrained volition, unfettered by any particular  circumstances or limitations whatsoever–the pure form  of willing.  This is  expressed in the modern libertarian view of completely uncoerced choice, the  absence of restraint (or “negative liberty” as understood by Thomas Hobbes).  The subjective will, on the other hand, is the principle of activity and  realization that involves  “differentiation, determination, and positing of a  determinacy as a content and object” (¶ 6).  This means that the will is  not merely unrestrained in acting but that it actually can give expression to the  doing or accomplishing of certain things, e.g., through talent or expertise  (sometimes called “positive freedom”).  The unity of both the moments of  abstract universality (the will in-itself) and subjectivity or particularity (the  will for-itself) is the concrete universal or true individuality (the will  in-and-for-itself).  According to Hegel, preservation of the distinction of these  two moments in the unity  (identity-in-difference) between universal and  particular will is what produces rational self-determination of an ego, as well  as the self-consciousness of the state as a whole.  Hegel’s conception of freedom  as self-determination is just this unity in difference of the universal and  subjective will, be it in the willing by individual persons or in the expressions  of will  by groups of individuals or collectivities.  The “negative  self-relation” of this freedom involves the subordination of the natural  instincts, impulses, and desires to conscious reflection and to goals and  purposes that are consciously chosen and that require commitment to rational  principles in order to properly guide action.
The overall structure of the Philosophy of Right is quite remarkable in  its “syllogistic” organization.  The main division of the work corresponds to  what Hegel calls the stages in the development of “the Idea of the absolutely  free will,” and these are Abstract Right, Morality, and Ethical Life.  Each of  these divisions is further subdivided triadically:  under Abstract Right there is  Property, Contract, and Wrong; under Morality falls Purpose and Responsibility,  Intention and Welfare, and Good and Conscience; finally, under Ethical Life comes  the Family, Civil Society, and the State.  These last subdivisions are further  subdivided into triads, with fourth level subdivisions occurring under Civil  Society and the State.   This triadic system of rubrics is no mere description of  a static model of social and political life.  Hegel claims that it gives  expression to the conceptual development of Spirit in human society based upon  the purely logical development of rationality provided in his Logic.  Thus, it is speculatively based and not derivable from empirical survey, although  the particularities of the system do indeed correspond to our experience and what  we know about ourselves anthropologically, culturally, etc.
The transition in the Logic from universality to particularity to  individuality (or concrete universality) is expressed in the social and political  context in the conceptual transition  from Abstract Right to Morality to Ethical  Life.  In the realm of Abstract Right, the will remains in its immediacy as an  abstract universal  that is expressed in personality and in the universal right  to possession of external things in property.  In the realm of  Morality,  the  will is no longer merely “in-itself,” or restricted to the specific  characteristics of legal personality, but becomes free “for-itself,” i.e., it is  will reflected into itself so as to produce a self-consciousness of the will’s  infinity.  The will is expressed, initially, in inner conviction and subsequently   in purpose, intention, and conviction.  As opposed to the merely juridical  person, the moral agent places primary value on subjective recognition of  principles or ideals that stand higher than positive law.  At this stage,  universality of a higher moral law is viewed as something inherently different  from subjectivity, from the will’s inward convictions and actions, and so in its  isolation from a system of objectively recognized legal rules the willing subject   remains “abstract, restricted, and formal” (¶ 108).  Because  the subject  is intrinsically a social being who needs association with others in order to  institutionalize the universal maxims of morality, maxims that cover all people,  it is only in the realm of Ethical Life that the universal and the subjective  will come into a unity through the objectification of the will in the  institutions of the Family, Civil Society, and the State.
In what follows, we trace through Hegel’s systematic development of the  “stages of the will,” highlighting only the most important points as necessary to  get an overall view of this work.
 a. Abstract Right
The  subject  of  Abstract Right (Recht) is the person as the bearer or  holder of individual rights.  Hegel claims that this focus on the right of  personality, while significant in distinguishing persons from mere things, is  abstract and without content, a  simple relation of the will to itself.  The  imperative of right is:  “Be a person and respect others as  persons” (¶  36).  In this formal conception of right, there is no question of  particular  interests, advantages, motives or intentions, but only the mere idea of the  possibility of choosing based on the having of permission, as long as one does  not infringe on the right of other persons.  Because of the possibilities of  infringement, the positive form of commands in this sphere are prohibitions.
(1) Property (the universality of will as embodied in things)
A person must translate his or her freedom into the external world “in order  to exist as Idea” (¶ 41), thus abstract right manifests itself in the  absolute right of appropriation over all things.  Property is the category  through which one becomes an object  to oneself in that one actualizes the will  through possession of something external.  Property is the embodiment of  personality and of freedom.  Not only can a person put his or her will into  something external through the taking possession of it and of using it, but one  can also alienate property or yield it to the will of another, including the  ability to labor for a restricted period of time.  One’s personality is  inalienable and one’s right to personality imprescriptible.  This means one  cannot alienate all of one’s labor time without becoming the property of another.
(2) Contract (the positing of explicit universality of will)
In this sphere, we have a relation of will to will, i.e., one holds property  not merely by means of the subjective will externalized in a thing, but by means  of another’s person’s will, and implicitly by virtue of one’s participation in a  common will.  The status of being an independent owner of something from which  one excludes the will of another is thus mediated in the identification of one’s  will with the other in the contractual relation, which presupposes that the  contracting parties “recognize each other as persons and property owners” (¶  71).  (Note the significant development here beyond the dialectic of lord and  bondsman.)  Moreover, when contract involves the alienation or giving up of  property, the external thing is now an explicit embodiment of the unity of wills.   In contractual relations of exchange, what remains identical as the property of  the individuals is its value, in respect to which the parties to the contract are  on an equal footing, regardless of the qualitative external differences between  the  things exchanged.  “Value is the universal in which the subjects of the  contract participate” (¶ 77).
(3) Wrong (the particular will opposing itself to the universal)
In immediate relations of persons to one another it is possible for a  particular will to be at variance with the universal through arbitrariness of  decision and contingency of circumstance, and so the appearance  (Erscheinung) of right takes on the character  of a show (Schein),  which is the inessential, arbitrary, posing  as the essential.  If the “show” is  only implicit and not explicit also, i.e., if the  wrong  passes in the doer’s  eyes as right, the  wrong  is  non-malicious.  In fraud a show is made to deceive  the other party and so in the doer’s eyes the right asserted is only a show.  Crime is wrong both in itself and from the doer’s point of view, such that wrong  is willed without even the pretense or show of right.  Here the form of acting  does not imply a recognition of  right but rather is an act of coercion through  exercise of force.  It is a “negatively infinite judgement” in that it asserts a  denial of rights to the victim, which is not only incompatible with the fact of  the matter but also self-negating in denying its own capacity for rights in  principle.
The penalty that falls on the criminal is not merely just but is “a right  established within the criminal himself, i.e., in his objectively embodied  will, in his action,” because the crime as the action of a rational  being  implies appeal to a universal standard recognized by the criminal (¶ 100).  The annulling of crime in this sphere of immediate right occurs first as revenge,  which as retributive is just in its content, but  in its form it is an act of a  subjective will and does not correspond with its universal content and hence as a  new transgression is defective and contradictory (¶ 102).  All crimes are  comparable in their universal property of being injuries, thus, in a sense it is  not something personal but the concept itself which carries out retribution.
Crime, as the will which is implicitly null, contains its negation in itself,  which is its punishment.
The nullity of crime is that it has set aside  right as such, but since right is absolute it cannot be set aside.  Thus, the act  of crime is not something positive, not a first thing, but  is something  negative, and punishment is the negation of crime’s negation.
 b. Morality
The demand for justice as punishment rather than as revenge, with regard to  wrong, implies the demand for a will which, though particular and subjective,  also wills the universal as such.  In wrong  the will has become aware of itself  as particular and has opposed itself to and contradicted the universal embodied  in rights.  At this stage the universally right is abstract and one-sided and  thus requires a move to a higher level of self-consciousness where the  universally right is mediated by the particular convictions of the willing  subject.  We go beyond the criminal’s defiance of the universal by substituting  for the abstract  conception of personality the more concrete conception of  subjectivity.  The criminal is now viewed as breaking his own law, and his crime  is a self-contradiction and not only a contradiction of a right outside  him.  This recognition brings us to the level of morality (Moralität) where  the will is free both in itself and for itself, i.e., the will is self-conscious  of its subjective freedom.
At  the level of morality the right of the subjective will is embodied in  immediate wills (as opposed to immediate things like property).  The defect of  this level, however,  is  that  the  subject is  only  for  itself, i.e., one is  conscious  of  one’s subjectivity  and  independence  but  is conscious  of  universality only as something different  from this subjectivity.  Therefore, the  identity of the particular will and the universal will is only implicit and the  moral point of view is that of a relation  of  “ought-to-be,” or the demand for  what is right. While the moral will externalizes itself in action, its  self-determination is a  pure “restlessness” of activity that never arrives at  actualization.
The right of the moral will has three aspects.  First, there is the right of  the will to act in its external environment, to recognize as its actions only  those that it has consciously willed in light of an aim or purpose (purpose and  responsibility).  Second, in my intention I ought to be aware not simply of my  particular action but also of the universal which is conjoined with it.  The  universal is what I have willed and is my intention.  The right of intention is  that the universal quality of the action is not merely implied but is known by  the agent, and so it lies from the start in one’s subjective will.  Moreover, the  content of such a will is not only the right of the particular subject to be  satisfied but is elevated to a universal end, the end of welfare or happiness  (intention and welfare).  The welfare of many unspecified persons is thus also an  essential end and right of subjectivity.   However, right as an abstract  universal and welfare as abstract particularity, may collide, since both are  contingent on circumstances for their satisfaction, e.g., in cases where claims  of right or welfare by someone may endanger the life of another there can be a  counter-claim to a right of distress. “This distress reveals the finitude and  therefore the contingency of both right and welfare” (¶ 128).  This  “contradiction” between right and welfare is overcome in the third aspect of the  moral will, the good which is “the Idea as the unity of the concept of the will  with the particular will” (¶ 129).
In addition to the right of the subjective will that whatever it recognizes as  valid shall be seen by it as good, and  that an action shall be imputed to it as  good or evil  in accordance with its knowledge of the worth which the action has  in its external objectivity (¶ 132), which together constitute a “right of  insight,” the will also must recognize the good as its duty,  which  is,  to  begin  with,  duty for duty’s sake, or duty  formally and without content (e.g.,  as expressed in the Kantian “categorical imperative”).  Because of this  lack of  content, the subjective will in its abstract reflection into itself is “absolute  inward certainty (Gewißheit) of self,” or conscience (Gewissen).  While true or authentic conscience is the disposition to will what is absolutely  good, and thus correspond with what is objectively right, purely formal  conscience lacks an objective system of principles and duties.  Although  conscience is ideally supposed to mean the identity of subjective knowing and  willing with the truly good, when it remains the subjective inner reflection of  self-consciousness into itself its claim to this identity is deficient and  one-sided.  Moreover, when the determinate character of right and duty reduces to  subjectivity,  the mere inwardness of the will, there is the potentiality of  elevating the self-will of particular individuals above the universal itself,  i.e., of “slipping into evil” (¶ 139).  What makes a person evil is the  choosing of natural desires in opposition to the good, i.e., to the concept of  the will.  When an individual attempts to pass off his or her action as good, and  thus imposing it on others, while being aware of the discrepancy between its  negative character and the objective universal good, the person falls into  hypocrisy.  This is one of several forms of perverse moral subjectivity that  Hegel discusses at length in his remarks (¶ 140).
 c. Ethical Life
Hegel’s analysis of the moral implications of “good and conscience” leads to  the conclusion that a concrete unity of the objective good with the subjectivity  of the will cannot be achieved at the level of personal morality since all  attempts at this are problematic.  The concrete identity of the good with the  subjective  will occurs only in moving to the level of ethical life  (Sittlichkeit), which Hegel says is “the Idea of freedom…the concept  of freedom developed into the existing world and the nature of  self-consciousness” (¶ 142).  Thus, ethical life is permeated with both  objectivity and subjectivity: regarded objectively it is the state and its  institutions, whose force (unlike abstract right) depends entirely on the  self-consciousness of citizens, on their subjective freedom; regarded  subjectively it is the ethical will of the individual which (unlike the moral  will) is aware of objective duties that express one’s inner sense of universality.  The rationality of the ethical order of society is thus constituted in the  synthesis of the concept of the will, both as universal and as particular, with  its embodiment in institutional life.
The synthesis of ethical life means that individuals not only act in  conformity with the ethical good but that they recognize the authority of ethical  laws.  This authority is not something alien to individuals since they are linked  to the ethical order through a strong identification which Hegel says “is more  like an identity than even the relation of faith or trust” (¶ 147).  The  knowledge of how the laws and institutions of society are binding on the will of  individuals entails a “doctrine of duties.”   In duty the individual finds  liberation both from dependence on mere natural impulse, which may or may not  motivate ethical actions, and  from indeterminate subjectivity which cannot  produce a clear view of proper action.  “In duty the individual acquires his  substantive freedom” (¶ 149).  In the performance of duty the individual  exhibits virtue when the ethical order is reflected in his or her character, and  when this is done by simple conformity with one’s duties it is rectitude.  When  individuals are simply identified with the actual ethical order such that their  ethical practices are habitual and second nature, ethical life appears in their  general mode of conduct as custom (Sitten).  Thus, the ethical order  manifests its right and validity vis-à-vis individuals.  In duty “the self-will  of the individual vanishes together with his private conscience which had claimed  independence and opposed itself to the ethical substance.  For when his character  is ethical, he recognizes as the end which moves him to act the universal which  is itself unmoved but is disclosed in its specific determinations as rationality  actualized.  He knows that his own dignity and the whole stability of his  particular ends are grounded in this same universal, and it is therein that he  actually attains these” (¶ 152).  However, this does not deny the right of  subjectivity, i.e., the right of individuals to be satisfied in their particular  pursuits and free activity; but this right is realized only in belonging to an  objective ethical order.  The “bond of duty” will be seen as a restriction on the  particular individual only if the self-will of subjective freedom is considered  in the abstract, apart from an ethical order (as is the case for both Abstract  Right and Morality).  “Hence, in this  identity of the universal will with the  particular will, right and duty coalesce, and by being in the ethical order a man  has rights in so far as he has duties, and duties in so far as he has rights”  (¶ 155).
In the realm of ethical life the logical syllogism of self-determination of  the Idea is most clearly applied.  The moments of universality, particularity,  and individuality initially are represented respectively in the institutions of  the family, civil society, and the state.  The family is “ethical mind in its  natural or immediate phase” and is characterized by love or the feeling of unity  in which one is not conscious of oneself as an independent person but only as a  member of the family unit to which one is bound.  Civil society, on the other  hand, comprises an association of individuals considered as self-subsistent and  who have no conscious sense of unity of membership but only pursue  self-interest, e.g., in satisfying needs, acquiring and protecting property, and  in joining organizations for mutual advantage.  Finally, the constitution of the  political state brings together in a unity the sense of the importance of the  whole or universal good along with the freedom of particularity of individual  pursuits and thus is “the end and actuality of both the substantial order and the  public life devoted thereto” (¶ 157).
 i. The Family
The family is characterized by love which is “mind’s feeling of its own  unity,” where one’s sense of individuality is within this unity, not as an  independent individual but as a member essentially related to the other family  members. Thus, familial love implies a contradiction between, on  the one hand,  not wanting to be a self-subsistent and independent person if that means feeling  incomplete and, on the other hand, wanting to be recognized in another person.  Familial love is truly an ethical unity, but because it is nonetheless a  subjective feeling it is limited in sustaining unity (pars. 158-59, and  additions).
(A) Marriage
The union of man and woman in marriage is both natural and spiritual, i.e., is  a physical relationship and one that is also self-conscious, and it is entered  into on the basis of the free consent of the persons.   Since this consent  involves bringing two persons into a union, there is the mutual surrender of  their natural individuality for the sake of union, which is both a  self-restriction and also a liberation because in this way individuals attain a  higher self-consciousness.
(B) Family Capital
The family as a unit has its external existence in property, specifically  capital (Vermögen) which constitutes permanent and secured  possessions that allow for endurance of the family as “person” (¶ 170).  This capital is the common property of all the family members, none of whom  possess property of their own, but it is administered by the head of the family,  the husband.
(C) Education of Children & Dissolution of the Family
Children provide the external and objective basis for the unity of marriage.  The love of the parents for their children is the explicit expression of their  love for each other, while their immediate feelings of love for each other are  only subjective.  Children have the right to maintenance and education, and in  this regard a claim upon the family capital, but parents have the right to  provide this service to the children and to instill discipline over the wishes of  their children. The education of children has a twofold purpose: the positive aim  of instilling ethical principles in them in the form of immediate feeling and the  negative one of raising them out of the instinctive physical level.  Marriage can  be dissolved not by whim but by duly constituted authority when there is total  estrangement of husband and wife. The ethical dissolution of the family results  when the children have been educated to be free and responsible persons and they  are of mature age under the law.  The natural dissolution of the family occurs  with the death of the parents, the result of which is the passing of inheritance  of property to the surviving family members.  The disintegration of the family  exhibits its immediacy and contingency as an expression of the ethical Idea  (pars. 173-80).
 ii. Civil Society
With civil society (bürgerliche Gesellschaft) we move from the  family or “the ethical idea still in its concept,” where consciousness of the  whole or totality is focal, to the “determination of particularity,” where the  satisfaction of subjective needs and desires is given free reign (pars. 181-182).   However, despite the pursuit of private or selfish ends in relatively  unrestricted social and economic activity, universality is implicit in the  differentiation of particular needs insofar as the welfare of an individual in  society is intrinsically bound up with that of others, since each  requires  another in some way to effectively engage in reciprocal activities like commerce,  trade, etc.  Because this system of interdependence is not self-conscious but  exists only in abstraction from the individual pursuit of need satisfaction, here  particularity and universality are only externally related.  Hegel says that  “this system may be prima facie regarded as the external state, the state based  on need, the state as the Understanding (Verstand) envisages it” (¶  183).  However, civil society is also a realm of mediation of particular wills  through social interaction and a means whereby individuals are educated  (Bildung) through their efforts and struggles toward a higher universal  consciousness.
(A) The System of Needs
This dimension of civil society involves the pursuit of need satisfaction.  Humans are different from animals in their ability to multiply needs and  differentiate them in various ways, which leads to their refinement and luxury.  Political economy discovers the necessary interconnections in the social and  universalistic side of need.  Work is the mode of acquisition and transformation  of the means for satisfying needs as well as a mode of practical education in  abilities and understanding.  Work also reveals the way in which people are  dependent upon one another in their self-seeking and how each individual  contributes to the need satisfaction of all others.  Society generates a  “universal permanent capital” (¶ 199) that everyone in principle can draw  upon, but the natural inequalities between individuals will translate into social  inequalities.  Furthermore, labor undergoes a division according to the  complexities of the system of production, which is reflected in social class  divisions: the agricultural (substantial  or immediate);  the  business  (reflecting or formal);  and  the civil servants (universal).  Membership in a  class is important for gaining status and recognition in a civil society.  Hegel  says that “A man actualizes himself only in becoming something definite, i.e.,  something specifically particularized; this means restricting himself exclusively  to one of the particular spheres of need.  In this class-system, the ethical  frame of mind therefore is rectitude and esprit de corps, i.e., the  disposition to make oneself a member of one of the moments of civil society by  one’s own act … in this way gaining recognition both in one’s own eyes and in  the eyes of others” (¶ 207).
The “substantial” agricultural class is based upon family relationships whose  capital is in the products of nature, such as the land, and tends to be  patriarchial, unreflective, and oriented toward dependence rather than free  activity.  In contrast to this focus on “immediacy,” the business class is  oriented toward work and reflection, e.g., in transforming raw materials for use  and exchange, which is a form of mediation of humans to one another.  The main  activities of the business class are craftsmanship, manufacture, and trade.  The  third class is the class of civil servants, which Hegel calls the “universal  class” because it has the universal interests of society as its concern.  Members  of this class are relieved from having to labor to support themselves and  maintain their livelihood either from private resources such as inheritance or  are paid a salary by the state as members of the bureaucracy.  These individuals  tend to be highly educated and must qualify for appointment to government  positions on the basis of merit.
(B) Administration of Justice
The  principle of rightness becomes civil law (Gesetz) when it is  posited, and in order to have binding force it must be given determinate objective  existence.  To be determinately existent, laws must be made universally known  through a public legal code.  Through a rational legal system, private property  and personality are given legal recognition and validity in civil society, and  wrongdoing now becomes an infringement, not merely of the subjective right of  individuals but also of the larger universal will that exists in ethical life.  The  court of justice is the means whereby right is vindicated as something universal  by addressing particular cases of violation or conflict without mere subjective  feeling or private bias.  “Instead of the injured party, the injured  universal now comes on the scene, and … this pursuit consequently  ceases to be the subjective and contingent retribution of revenge and is  transformed into the genuine reconciliation of right with itself, i.e, into  punishment” (¶ 220).  Moreover, court proceedings and legal processes  must take place according to rights and rules of evidence; judicial proceedings  as well as the laws themselves must be made public; trial should be by jury; and  punishment should fit the crime.  Finally, in the administration of  justice,  “civil society returns to its concept, to the unity of the implicit universal  with the subjective particular, although here the latter is only that present in  single cases and the universality in question is that of abstract right”  (¶ 229).
(C) The Police and the Corporation
The Police (Polizei) for Hegel is understood broadly as the public  authorities in civil society.  In addition to crime fighting organizations, it  includes agencies that provide oversight over public utilities as well as  regulation of and, when necessary, intervention into activities related to the  production, distribution, and sale of goods and services, or with any of the  contingencies that can affect the rights and welfare of individuals and society  generally (e.g., defense of the public’s right not to be defrauded, and also  the management of goods  inspection).  Also,  the public authority superintends  education and organizes the relief of  poverty.  Poverty must be addressed both  through private charity and public assistance since in civil society it  constitutes a social wrong when poverty results in the creation of a class of  “penurious rabble” (¶ 245).  Society looks to colonization to increase its wealth but  poverty remains a problem with no apparent solution.
The corporation (Korporation) applies especially to the business class,  since this class is concentrated on the particularities of social existence and  the corporation has the function of bringing implicit similarities between  various private interests into explicit existence in forms of association.  This  is not the same as our contemporary business corporation but rather is a  voluntary association of persons based on occupational or various social  interests (such as professional and trade guilds, educational clubs, religious  societies, townships, etc.)  Because of the integrating function of the  corporation, especially in regard to the social and economic division of labor,  what appear as selfish purposes in civil society are shown to be at the same time  universal through the formation of concretely recognized commonalities.  Hegel  says that “a Corporation has the right, under the surveillance of the public  authority, (a) to look after its own interests within its own sphere, (b) to  co-opt members, qualified objectively by requisite skill and rectitude, to a  number fixed by the general structure of society, (c) to protect its members  against particular contingencies, (d) to provide the education requisite to fit  other to become members.  In short, the right is to come on the scene like a  second family for its members …” (¶ 252).  Furthermore, the family is  assured greater stability of livelihood insofar as its providers are corporation  members who command the respect due to them in their social positions.  “Unless  he is a member of an authorized Corporation (and it is only by being authorized  that an association becomes a Corporation), an individual is without rank or  dignity, his isolation reduces his business to mere self-seeking, and his  livelihood and satisfaction become insecure” (¶ 253).  Because individual  self-seeking is raised to a higher level of common pursuits, albeit restricted to  the interest of a sectional group, individual self-consciousness is raised to  relative universality. Hence, “As the family was the first, so the Corporation is  the second ethical root of the state, the one planted in civil society” (¶  255).
 iii. The State
The political State, as the third moment of Ethical Life, provides a synthesis  between the principles governing the Family and those governing Civil Society.  The rationality of the state is located in the realization of the universal  substantial will in the self-consciousness of particular individuals elevated to  consciousness of universality.   Freedom becomes explicit and objective in this  sphere.  “Since the state is mind objectified, it is only as one of its members  that the individual has objectivity, genuine individuality, and an ethical  life … and the individual’s destiny is the living of a universal life” (¶  258).  Rationality is concrete in the state in so far as its content is comprised  in the unity of objective freedom (freedom of the universal or substantial will)  and subjective freedom (freedom of everyone in knowing and willing of particular  ends); and in its form rationality is in self-determining action or laws and  principles which are logical universal thoughts (as in the logical  syllogism).
The Idea of the State is itself divided into three moments:  (a) the immediate  actuality of the state as a self-dependent organism, or Constitutional Law; (b)  the relation of states to other states in International Law; (c) the universal  Idea as Mind or Spirit which gives itself actuality in the process of  World-History.
 1) Constitutional Law
(1) The Constitution (internally)
Only through the political constitution of the State can universality and  particularity be welded together into a real unity.  The self-consciousness of  this unity is expressed in the recognition on the part of each citizen that the  full meaning of one’s actual freedom is found in the objective laws and  institutions provided by the State.  The aspect of identity comes to the fore in  the recognition that individual citizens  give to the ethical laws such that they  “do not live as private persons for their own ends alone, but in the very act of  willing these they will the universal in the light of the universal, and their  activity is consciously aimed at none but the universal end” (¶ 260).  The  aspect of differentiation, on the other  hand, is found in “the right of  individuals to their particular satisfaction,” the right of subjective freedom  which is maintained in Civil  Society.  Thus, according to Hegel, “the universal  must be furthered, but subjectivity on the other hand must attain its full and  living development.  It is only when both these moments subsist in their  strength that the state can be regarded as articulated and genuinely organized”  (¶ 260, addition).
As was indicated in the introduction to the concept of Ethical Life above, the  higher authority of the laws and  institutions of society requires a doctrine of  duties.   From the vantage point of the political State, this means that there  must be a correlation between rights and duties.  “In the state, as something  ethical, as the inter-penetration of the substantive and the particular, my  obligation to what is substantive is at the same time the embodiment of my  particular freedom.  This means that in the state duty and right are united in  one and the same relation” (¶ 261).  In fulfilling one’s duties one is also  satisfying particular interests, and the conviction that this is so Hegel calls  “political sentiment” (politische Gesinnung) or patriotism.  “This  sentiment is, in general, trust (which may pass over into a greater or lesser  degree of educated insight), or the consciousness that my interest, both  substantive and particular, is contained and preserved in another’s (that is, the  state’s) interest and end, i.e., in the other’s relation to me as an individual”  (¶ 268).
Thus, the  “bond of duty” cannot involve being coerced into  obeying the laws of the State.  “Commonplace thinking often has the impression  that force holds the state together,  but  in fact its only bond is the sense of  order which everybody possesses” (¶ 268, addition).
According to Hegel, the political state is rational in so far as it inwardly  differentiates itself according to the nature of the Concept (Begriff).  The principle of the division of powers expresses inner differentiation, but  while these powers are distinguished they must also be built into an organic  whole such that each contains in itself the other moments so that the political  constitution is a concrete unity in difference.  Constitutional Law is  accordingly divided into three moments: (a) the Legislature which establishes the  universal through lawmaking; (b) the Executive which subsumes the particular  under the universal through administering the laws; (c) the Crown which is the  power of subjectivity of the state in the providing of the act of  “ultimate  decision” and thus forming into unity the other two powers.  Despite the  syllogistic sequence of universality, particularity, and individuality in these  three constitutional powers, Hegel discusses the Crown first followed by the  Executive and the Legislature respectively.  Hegel understands the concept of the  Crown in terms of constitutional monarchy.
(a) The Crown
“The power of the crown contains in itself the three  moments of  the  whole,  namely, (a) the universality of the constitution  and the laws; (b) counsel, which refers the  particular to the universal; and (g) the moment  of ultimate decision, as the self-determination to which everything else  reverts and from which everything else derives the beginning of its actuality”  (¶ 275).  The third moment is what gives expression to the sovereignty of  the state, i.e., that the various activities, agencies, functions and powers of  the state are not self-subsistent but rather have their basis ultimately in the  unity of the state as a single self or self-organized organic whole.  The monarch  is the bearer of the individuality of the state and its sovereignty is the  ideality in unity in which the particular functions and powers of  the state  subsist.  “It is only as a  person,  the monarch,  that the personality of the  state is actual.  Personality expresses the concept as such; but the person  enshrines the actuality of the concept, and only when the concept is determined  as a person is it the Idea or truth” (¶ 279).
The monarch is not a despot but rather a constitutional monarch, and he does  not act in a capricious manner but is bound by a decision-making process, in  particular to the recommendations and decisions of his cabinet (supreme advisory  council).  The monarch functions solely to give agency to the state, and so his  personal traits are irrelevant and his ascending to the throne is based on  hereditary succession, and thus on the accident of birth.  “In a completely  organized state, it is only a question of the culminating point of formal  decision … he has only to say ‘yes’ and dot the ‘i’ …. In a well organized  monarchy, the objective aspect belongs to law alone,  and the monarch’s part is  merely to set to the law the subjective ‘I will'” (¶ 280, addition).  The  “majesty of the monarch” lies in the free asserting of ‘I will’ as an expression  of the unity of the state and the final step in establishing law.
(b) The Executive
The executive has the task of executing and applying the decisions formally  made by the monarch.  “This task of merely subsuming the particular under the  universal is comprised in the executive power,  which  also includes  the powers  of the judiciary and the  police” (¶ 287).  Also, the executive is the  higher authority that oversees the filling of positions of responsibilities in  corporations.  The executive is comprised of the civil servants proper and the  higher advisory officials organized into committees, both of which are connected  to the monarch through their supreme departmental heads.  Overall, government has  its division of labor into various centers of administration managed by special  officials.  Individuals are appointed to executive functions on the basis of  their knowledgibility and proof of ability and tenure is conditional on the  fulfillment of duties, with the offices in the civil service being open to all  citizens.
The executive is not an unchecked bureaucratic authority.  “The security of  the state and its subjects  against the misuse of power  by ministers and their  officials lies directly in their hierarchical organization  and their  answerability; but it lies too in the authority given to societies and  corporations …” (¶ 295).  However, civil servants will tend to be  dispassionate, upright, and polite in part as “a result of direct education in  thought and ethical conduct” (¶ 296).  Civil servants and the members of the  executive  make up the largest section of the middle class, the class with a  highly developed intelligence and consciousness of right.  Moreover, “The  sovereign working on the middle class at the top, and Corporation-rights  working on it at the bottom, are the institutions which effectively prevent it  from acquiring the isolated position of an aristocracy and using its education  and skill as a means to an arbitrary tyranny” (¶ 297).
(c) The Legislature
For Hegel, “The legislature is concerned (a) with the laws as such in so far  as they require fresh and extended determination; and (b) with the content of  home affairs affecting the entire state” (¶ 298).  Legislative activity  focuses on both providing well-being and happiness for citizens as well as  exacting services from them (largely in the form of monetary taxes).  The proper  function of legislation is distinguished from the function of administration  and state regulation in that the content of the former are determinate laws that  are wholly universal whereas in administration it is application of the law to  particulars, along with enforcing the law.  Hegel also says that the other two  moments of the political constitution, the monarchy and the executive, are the  first two moments of the legislature, i.e., are reflected in the legislature  respectively through the ultimate decision regarding proposed laws and an  advising function in their formation.  Hegel rejects the idea of independence or  separation of powers for the sake of checks and balances, which he holds destroys  the unity of the state (¶ 300, addition).  The third moment in the  legislature is the estates (Stände), which are the classes of society  given political recognition in the legislature.
In the legislature, the estates “have the function of bringing  public affairs  into existence not only implicitly, but also actually, i.e., of bringing into  existence the moment of subjective formal freedom, the public consciousness as an  empirical universal, of which the thoughts and opinions of the Many are  particulars” (¶ 301).  Not only do the estates guarantee the general welfare  and public freedom, but they are also the means by which the state as a whole  enters the subjective consciousness of the people through their participation in  the state.  Thus, the estates incorporate the private judgment and will of  individuals in civil society and give it political significance.
The estates have an important integrating function in the state overall.  “Regarded as a mediating organ, the Estates stand between the government in  general on the one hand, and the nation broken up into particulars (people and  associations) on the other. … [I]n common with the organized executive, they are a  middle term preventing both the extreme isolation of the power of the crown …  and also the isolation of the particular interests of  persons, societies and  Corporations” (¶ 302).  Also, the organizing function of the estates  prevents groups in society from becoming formless masses that could form  anti-government feelings and rise up in blocs in opposition to the state.
The three classes of civil society, the agricultural, the business, and the  universal class of civil servants, are each given political voice in the Estates  Assembly in accordance with their distinctiveness in the lower spheres of civil  life.  The legislature is divided into two houses, an upper and lower.  The upper  house comprises the agricultural estate (including the peasant farmers and landed  aristocracy), a class “whose ethical life is natural, whose basis is family  life, and, so far as its livelihood  is concerned, the possession of land.  Its  particular members attain their position by birth, just as the monarch does, and,  in common with him, they possess a will which rests on itself alone” (¶  305).  Landed gentry inherit their  estates and so owe their position to birth  (primogeniture) and thus are free from the exigencies and uncertainties of the  life of business and state interference.  The relative independence of this class  makes it particularly suited for public office as well as a mediating element  between the crown and civil society.
The second section of the estates, the business class, comprises the  “fluctuating and changeable element in civil society” which can enter politics only through its  deputies or representatives (unlike the agricultural estate from which members  can present themselves to the Estates Assembly in person).  The appointment of  deputies is “made by society as a society” both because of the multiplicity of  members but also because representation must reflect the organization of civil  society into associations, communities, and corporations.  It is only as a member  of such groups that an individual is a member of the state, and hence rational  representation implies that consent to legislation is to be given not directly by  all but only by “plenipotentiaries” who are chosen on the basis of their  understanding of public affairs as well as managerial and political acumen,  character, insight, etc.  Moreover, their charge is to further the general  interest of society and not the interest of a particular association or  corporation instead  (¶ 308-10).
The deputies of civil society are selected by the various corporations, not on  the basis of  universal direct suffrage which Hegel believed inevitably leads to  electoral indifference, and they adopt the point of view of society.  “Deputies  are sometimes regarded as ‘representatives’; but they are representatives in an  organic, rational sense only if they are representatives not of  individuals or a  conglomeration of them, but of one of the essential spheres of society and its  large-scale interests.  Hence, representation cannot now be taken to mean  simply the substitution of one man for another; the point is that the interest  itself is actually present in its representative, while he himself is there to  represent the objective element of his own being” (¶ 311).
The debates that take place in the Estates Assembly are to be open to the  public, whereby citizens can become politically educated both about national  affairs and the true character of their own interests.  “The formal subjective  freedom of individuals consists in their having and expressing their own private  judgements, opinions, and  recommendations as affairs of state.  This freedom is  collectively manifested as what is called ‘public opinion’, in which what is  absolutely universal, the substantive and the true, is linked with its opposite,  the purely particular and private opinions of the Many” (¶ 316).  Public  opinion is a “standing self-contradiction” because, on the one hand, it gives  expression to genuine needs and proper tendencies of common life along with  common sense views about important matters and, on the other, is infected with  accidental opinion, ignorance, and faulty judgment. “Public opinion therefore  deserves  to be  as  much respected as despised — despised for its concrete  expression and for the concrete consciousness it  expresses,  respected for its  essential basis, a basis which only glimmers more or less dimly in that concrete  expression” (¶ 318).  Moreover, while there is freedom of public  communication, freedom of the press is not totally unrestricted as freedom does  not mean absence of all restriction, either in word or deed.
Hegel calls the class of civil servants the “universal class” not only because  as members of the executive their function is to “subsume the particular under  the universal” in the administration of law, but also because they reflect a  disposition of mind (due perhaps largely from their education) that transcends  concerns with selfish ends in the devotion to the discharge of public functions  and to the public universal good.  As one of the classes of the estates, civil  servants also participate in the legislature as an “unofficial class,”  which  seems to mean that as members of the executive they will attend legislative  assemblies in an advisory capacity, but this is not entirely clear from Hegel’s  text.  Also, given that the monarch and the classes of civil society when  conceived in abstraction are opposed to each other as “the one and the many,”  they must become “fused into a unity” or mediated together through the  civil servant class.  From the point of view of the crown the executive is such a  middle term, because it carries out the final decisions of the crown and makes it  “particularized” in civil society.  On the other hand, in order for the classes  of civil society to actually sense this unity with the crown a mediation must  occur from the other direction, so to speak, where the upper  house of the  estates, in virtue of certain likenesses to the Crown (e.g., role of birth for  one’s position) is able to mediate between the Crown and civil society as a  whole.
(2) Sovereignty vis-à-vis foreign States
The interpenetration of the universal with the particular will through a  complex system of social and political mediations is what produces the  self-consciousness of the nation-state considered as an organic (internally  differentiated and interrelated) totality or concrete individual.  In this  system, particular individuals consciously pursue the universal ends of the  State, not out of external or mechanical conformity to law, but in the free  development of personal individuality and the expression of the unique  subjectivity of each.  However, individuality is not something possessed by  particular persons alone, or even primarily by such persons.  The state as a  whole, i.e., the nation-state as distinct from the political state as one of its  moments, constitutes a higher form of individuality.  In principle, Mind or  Spirit possesses a singleness in its “negative self-relation,” i.e., in the sense  that unity in a being is a function of setting itself off from other beings.  “Individuality is awareness of one’s existence as a unit in sharp distinction from  others.  It manifests itself here in the state as a relation to other states,  each of which is autonomous vis-à-vis the others.  This autonomy embodies  mind’s actual awareness of itself as a unit and hence it is the most fundamental  freedom which a people possesses as well as its highest dignity” (¶ 322).  For any being to have self-conscious independence requires distinguishing the  self from any of its contingent characteristics (inner self-negation), which  externally is a distinction from another being.  This consciousness of what one  is not is for the nation-state its negative relation to itself embodied  externally in the world as the relation of one state to  another.   However, this  is not a mere externality, “But in fact this negative relation is that  moment  in the state which is most supremely its own, the state’s actual infinity as the  ideality of everything finite within it” (¶ 323).
According to Hegel, war is an “ethical moment” in the life of a nation-state  and hence is neither purely accidental nor an inherent evil.  Because there is no  higher earthly power ruling over nation-states, and because these entities are  oriented to preserving their existence and sovereignty, conflicts leading to war  are inevitable.  Also, defense of one’s nation is an ethical duty and the  ultimate test of one’s patriotism is war.   “Sacrifice on behalf of the  individuality of the state is the substantial tie between the state and all its  members and so is a universal duty” (¶ 325).  In making a sacrifice for the  sake of the state individuals prove their courage, which involves a transcendence  of concern with egoistic interests and mere material existence.  “The intrinsic  worth of courage as a disposition of mind is to be found in the genuine absolute,  final end, the sovereignty of the  state.  The work of courage is to actualize  this final end, and the means to this end is the sacrifice of personal actuality”  (¶ 328).  Moreover, war, along with catastrophy, disease, etc, highlights  the finitude, insecurity, and ultimate transitoriness of human existence and puts  the health of a state to a test.  Hegel does not consider the ideal of “perpetual peace,”  as advocated by Kant, a realistic goal towards which humanity can strive.  Not only is the sovereignty of each state imprescriptible, but any alliance or  league of states will be established in opposition to others.
 2) International Law
“International law springs from the relations between autonomous states.  It  is for this reason that what is absolute in it retains the form of an  ought-to-be,  since its actuality depends on different wills each of which is  sovereign” (¶ 330).  States are not private persons in civil society who  pursue their self-interest in the context of universal interdependence but rather  are completely autonomous entities with no relations of private right or  morality.   However, since a state cannot escape having relations with other  states, there must be at least some sort of recognition of each by the other.  International law prescribes that treaties between states ought to be kept, but  this universal proviso remains abstract because the sovereignty of a state is its  guiding principle, hence states are to that extent in a state of nature in  relation to each other (in the Hobbesian sense of there being natural rights to  one’s survival with no natural duties to others).  “Their rights are actualized  only in their particular wills and not in a universal will with constitutional  powers over them.  This  universal proviso of international law therefore does  not go beyond an ought-to-be, and what really happens is  that  international  relations in accordance with treaty alternate with the severance of these  relations” (¶ 333).  Obviously, if states come to disagree about the nature  of their treaties, etc., and there is no acceptable compromise for each party,  then matters will ultimately be settled by war.
States recognize their own welfare as the highest law governing their  relations to one another, however,  the claim by a state to recognition of this  welfare is quite different from claims to welfare by individual person in civil  society.  “The ethical substance, the state, has its determinate being, i.e., its  right, directly embodied in something existent … and the principle of its  conduct and behavior can only be this concrete existent and not one of many  universal thoughts supposed to be moral commands” (¶ 337).  States recognize  each other as states, and even in war there is awareness of the possibility that  peace can be restored and that therefore war ought to come to an end, as well as  understandings about the proper limitations on the waging of war.  However, at  most this translates into the jus gentium, the law of nations understood  as customary relationships, which remains a “maelstrom of external contingency.”  The principles of the mind or spirit (Volksgeist) of a nation-state are  wholly restricted because its particularity is already that of realized  individuality, possessing objective actuality and self-consciousness.  Hence, the  reciprocal relations of states to one another partake of a “dialectic of  finitude” out of which arises the universal mind, “the mind of the world, free  from all restriction, producing itself as that which exercises its right–and  its right is the highest right of all–over these finite minds in the  ‘history of the world which is the world’s court of judgment'” (¶ 340).
 3) World History
To say that history is the world’s court of judgment is to say that over and  above the nation-states, or national “spirits,” there is the mind or Spirit of  the world (Weltgeist) which pronounces its verdict through the development  of history itself.  The verdicts of world history, however, are not expressions  of mere might, which in itself is abstract and non-rational.  Rather than blind  destiny, “world history is the necessary development, out of the concepts of  mind’s freedom alone, of the moments of reason and so of the self-consciousness  and freedom of  mind” (¶ 342).  The history of  Spirit is the development  through time of its own self-consciousness through the actions of peoples,  states, and world historical actors who, while absorbed in their own interests, are  nonetheless the unconscious instruments of the work of Spirit.  “All actions,  including  world-historical actions, culminate with individuals as subjects  giving actuality to the substantial.  They are the living instruments of what is  in substance  the deed  of the world mind and they are therefore directly at one  with that deed though it is concealed from them and is not their aim and  object”  (¶ 348).  The actions of great men are produced through their subjective  willing and their passion, but the substance of these deeds is actually the  accomplishment not of the individual agent but of the World Spirit (e.g., the  founding of states by world-historical heroes).
Hegel says that in the history of the world we can distinguish several  important formations of the self-consciousness of Spirit in the course of its  free self-development, each corresponding to a significant principle.  More  specifically, there are four world-historical epochs, each manifesting a  principle of Spirit as expressed through a dominant culture.  In the  Philosophy of Right, Hegel discusses these in a very abbreviated way in  paragraphs 253-260, which brings this work to an end.  Here we will draw from the  more elaborated treatment in the appendix to the introduction to Hegel’s lectures  on the Philosophy of World History.
(1) The Oriental Realm (mind in its immediate substance)
Here Spirit exists in its substantiality (objectivity) without inward  differentiation.  Individuals have no self-consciousness of personality or of  rights–they are still immersed in external nature (and their divinities are  naturalistic as well).  Hegel characterizes this stage as one of consciousness in  its immediacy, where subjectivity and substantiality are unmediated.  In his  Philosophy of History Hegel discusses China, India, and Persia  specifically and suggests that these cultures do not actually have a history but  rather are subject to natural cyclical processes.  The typical governments of  these cultures are theocratic and more particularly despotism, aristocracy, and  monarchy respectively.  Persia and Egypt are seen as transitional from these  “unhistorical” and “non-political” states.  Hegel calls this period the  “childhood” of Spirit.
(2) The Greek Realm (mind in the simple unity of subjective and objective)
In this realm, we have the mixing of subjective freedom and substantiality in  the ethical life of the Greek polis, because the ancient Greek city-states  give expression to personal individuality for those who are free and have status.   However, the relation of individual to the state is not self-conscious but is  unreflective and based on obedience to custom and tradition.  Hence, the  immediate union of subjectivity with the substantial mind is unstable and leads  to fragmentation.  This is the period of the “adolescence” of Spirit.
(3) The Roman Realm (mind in its abstract universality)
At this stage, individual personality is recognized in formal rights, thus  including a level of reflection absent in the Greek realm of “beautiful freedom.”   Here freedom is difficult because the universal subjugates individuals,  i.e., the state becomes an abstraction over above its citizens who must be  sacrificed to the severe demands of a state in which individuals form a  homogeneous mass.  A tension between the two principles of individuality and  universality ensues, manifesting itself in the formation of political despotism  and insurgency against it.  This realm gives expression to the “manhood” of  Spirit.
(4) The Germanic Realm (reconciled unity of subjective and objective mind)
This realm comprises along with Germany and the Nordic peoples the major  European nations (France, Italy, Spain) along with England. The principle of  subjective freedom comes to the fore in such a way as to be made explicit in the  life of Spirit and also mediated with substantiality.  This involves a gradual  development that begins with the rise of Christianity and its spiritual  reconciliation of inner and outer life and culminates in the appearance of the  modern nation-state, the rational Idea of which is articulated in the  Philosophy of Right. (Along the way there are several milestones Hegel  discusses in his Philosophy of History that are especially important in  the developing of the self-consciousness of freedom, in particular the  Reformation, the Enlightenment, and the French Revolution.)  One of the  significant features of the modern world is the overcoming of the antithesis of  church and state that developed in the Medieval period.  This final stage of  Spirit is mature “old age.”
In sum, for Hegel the modern nation-state can be said to manifest a  “personality” and a self-consciousness of its inherent nature and goals, indeed a  self-awareness of everything which is implicit in its concept, and is able to act  rationally and in accordance with its self-awareness.  The modern nation-state is  a “spiritual individual,” the true historical individual, precisely because of  the level  of realization of self-consciousness that  it  actualizes.  The  development of the perfected  nation-state is the end or goal of history because  it  provides an optimal level of realization of self-consciousness, a more  comprehensive level of realization of freedom than mere natural individuals, or  other forms of human organization, can produce.
 7. Closing Remarks
In closing this account of Hegel’s theory of the state, a few words on a  “theory and practice” problem of the modern state.  In the preface to the  Philosophy of Right Hegel is quite clear that his science of the state  articulates the nature of the state, not as it ought to be, but as it really is,  as something inherently rational.  Hegel’s famous quote in this regard is  “What  is rational is actual and what is actual is rational,” where by the ‘actual’  (Wirklich)  Hegel means not the merely existent, i.e., a state that can be  simply identified empirically, but the actualized or realized state, i.e., one  that corresponds to its rational concept and thus in some sense must be  perfected.  Later in the introduction of the Idea of the state in paragraph 258,  Hegel is at pains to distinguish the Idea of the state from a state understood in  terms of its historical origins and says that while the state is the way of God  in the world we must not focus on particular states or on particular institutions  of the state, but only on the Idea itself.  Furthermore he says, “The state is no  ideal work of art; it stands on earth and so in the sphere of caprice, chance,  and error, and bad behavior may disfigure it in many respects.  But the ugliest  of men, or a criminal, or an invalid, or a cripple, is still always a living man.  The affirmative, life, subsists despite his defects, and it is this affirmative  factor which is our theme here” (¶ 258, addition).  The issue, then, is  whether the actual state — the subject of philosophical science — is  only a theoretical possibility and whether from a practical point of view all  existing states are in some way disfigured or deficient.  Our ability to  rationally distill from existing states their ideal characteristics does not  entail that a fully actualized state does, or will, exist.  Hence, there is perhaps  some ambiguity in Hegel’s claim about the modern state as an actualization of freedom.
 8. References and Further Reading
 a. Works by Hegel in German and in English Translation
Below are works by Hegel that relate most directly to his social and political philosophy.

Encyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse,  Berlin 1830; ed. G. Lasson & O. Pöggler (Hamburg, 1959).

In the third  volume of this work, The Philosophy of  Spirit, the section on Objective Spirit  corresponds to Hegel’s Philosophy of Right.


Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, ed. J. Hoffmeister.  Hamburg,  1955.
Hegels Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, 2nd edn.  hrsg. G. Lasson.  Leipzig, 1921.

This is the most recent edition referred to in  T. M. Knox’s translation of 1952.


Hegel’s Logic, trans. William Wallace.  Oxford University Press,  1892.
Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller.  Oxford University  Press, 1977.
Hegel’s Philosophy of Mind, trans. William Wallace & A. V. Miller.  Oxford University Press, 1971.
Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox.  Clarendon Press, 1952;  Oxford University Press, 1967.
Hegel’s Political Writings, trans. T. M. Knox, with an introductory  essay by Z. A. Pelczynski.  Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964.

This contains the  following pieces: “The German Constitution,” “On the Recent Domestic Affairs of  Wurtemberg …,”  “The Proceedings of the Estates Assembly in the Kingdom of  Wurtemberg, 1815-1816,” and “The English Reform Bill.”


Hegels sämtliche Werke, vol. VIII, ed. E. Gans. Berlin: 1833,  1st ed.; 1854, 2nd ed..

These were the first editions of  the material of The Philosophy of Right to incorporate additions culled  from notes taken at Hegel’s lectures.  T. M. Knox reproduces these in his 1952  translation.


Jenaer Realphilosophie I: Die Vorlesungen von 1803/4, ed. J.  Hoffmeister.  Leipzig, 1913.
Jenaer Realphilosophie II: Die Vorlesungen von 1805/6, ed. J.  Hoffmeister.  Hamburg, 1967.
Lectures on the Philosophy of World History: Introduction, trans. H. B.  Nisbet, with an introduction by Duncan Forbes.  Cambridge University Press, 1975.

This is based on the 1955 German edition by J. Hoffmeister.


Natural Law, trans. T. M. Knox, with an introduction by H. B. Acton.  Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1977.
Phänomenologie des Geistes, ed. J. Hoffmeister.  Hamburg: Felix  Meiner, 1952.
The Philosophy of History, trans. J. B. Sibree.  New York: Dover  Publications Inc., 1956.

This is a reprint of the 1899 translation (the first was  done in 1857) of Hegel’s Lectures on the Philosophy of History, published  by Colonial House Press.  The Dover edition has a new introduction by C. J.  Friedrich.


Political Writings.  Eds. L. Dickie & H. B. Nisbet.  Cambridge  Texts in the History of Political Thought.  Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press, 1999.
Politische Schriften, Nachwort von Jürgen Habermas.  Frankfurt/Main, 1966.  A more recent edition of the material of the Schriften  zur Politik (see below).
Reason in History, trans. R. S. Hartman.  New York, 1953.  The  introduction to Hegel’s lectures on the Philosophy of World History.
Schriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie, 2nd ed. hrsg.  Georg Lasson.  Leipzig, 1923.  This is the basis of  T. M. Knox’s translations in  Hegel’s Political Writings, 1964.
System of Ethical Life and First Philosophy of Spirit, trans. H. S.  Harris & T. M. Knox.  Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,  1979.
Die Vernunft in der Geschichte, ed. J. Hoffmeister.  Hamburg, 1955.

This is the fourth edition of Hegel’s lectures on the Philosophy of World History  given in Berlin from 1822-1830; the previous editions were done by Eduard Gans  (1837), Karl Hegel (1840), and Georg Lasson (1917, 1920, 1930).  In the 1930  edition, Lasson added additional manuscript material by Hegel as well as lecture  notes from students, which are preserved in Hoffmeister’s edition.


Werke. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1970.

This is the most recent and  comprehensive collection of Hegel’s works.  His social and political writings are  contained in various volumes.



 b. Works on Hegel’s Social and Political Philosophy
The books listed below either focus on one or more aspects of Hegel’s social  and political thought or include some discussion in this area and, moreover, are  significant enough works on Hegel to be included.  The most comprehensive  bibliography on Hegel is Hegel-Bibliographie (München: K. G Saur  Verlag, 1980).  For books and articles in the last 25 years, consult the  Philosopher’s Index.

Avineri,  Shlomo.  Hegel’s  Theory  of  the  Modern  State. Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1972.
Bosanquet, Bernard.  The Philosophical Theory of the State.  4th edition, London: Macmillan, 1930, 1951.
Cullen,  Bernard.  Hegel’s  Social  and  Political  Thought:  An  Introduction.  New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1979.
Findlay, John.  Hegel: A Re-examination (1958).  Oxford: Oxford  University Press, 1976.
Foster, Michael B. The Political Philosophies of Plato and Hegel.  Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1935/1968.
Dickey, Laurence.  Religion, Economics, and the Politics of  Spirit.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Franco, Paul. Hegel’s Philosophy of Freedom.  New Haven, CT:  Yale  University Press, 2000.
Gray,  Jesse Glen.  Hegel And Greek Thought. New York:  Harper  &  Row, 1968.
Hardimon,  Michael O.  Hegel’s Social Philosophy: The  Project  of  Reconciliation. Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Harris, H. S.  Hegel’s Development, vols. 1 & 2.  Oxford: Clarendon  Press, 1972, 1983.
Haym, Rudolf.  Hegel und seine Zeit.  Berlin, 1857;  Hildenshine,  1962).
Henrich, Dieter & R. P. Horstman.  Hegels Philosophie des Rechts.  Stuttgart: Klett-Catta, 1982.
Hicks, Steven V. International Law and the Possibility of a Just World  Order: An Essay on Hegel’s Universalism.  Value Inquiry Book Series 78.  Amsterdam/Atlanta, GA: Rodopi, 1999.
Hyppolite, Jean.  Genesis and Structure of Hegel’s Phenomenology of  Spirit (1946).  Trans. S. Cherniak & J. Heckman.  Evanston,  IL: Northwestern University Press, 1974.
Kainz,  Howard  P.  Hegel’s  Philosophy  of  Right  with  Marx’s  Commentary. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1974.
Kaufman, Walter  A.  Hegel’s Political  Philosophy.  New  York: Atherton Press, 1970.
________.  Hegel: A Reinterpretation.  New York: Anchor Books, 1966.
Kelly, George Armstrong.  Hegel’s Retreat From Eleusis: Studies In  Political Thought.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.
Kojeve, Alexander.  Introduction to the Reading of Hegel (1947).  Ed.  Allen Bloom, trans. J. H. Nichols.  New York: Basic Books, 1969.
Lakeland,  Paul.  The Politics of Salvation: The Hegelian Idea  of the  State.  Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1984.
MacGregor,  David.  The Communist Ideal in Hegel and Marx.  Toronto:  University of Toronto Press, 1984.
___________.   Hegel, Marx, and the English State.  University of  Toronto Press, 1996.
Marcuse,  Herbert.  Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the  Rise  of Social  Theory. Boston: Beacon  Press, 1960.
Mehta,  V.R.  Hegel and the Modern State.  New Delhi: Associated  Publishing House, 1968.
Mitias, Michael.  Moral Foundation of the State in Hegel’s Philosophy of  Right. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1984.
Morris, George S.  Hegel’s Philosophy of the State and of History.  Chicago: S.  C. Griggs & Co., 18871, 18922.
O’Brien,  George Dennis.  Hegel On Reason and History.  Chicago:  Chicago University Press, 1975.
O’Neil, John, ed.  Hegel’s Dialectic of Desire and Recognition: Texts and  Commentary.  Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1996.
Paolucci,  Henry.  The  Political  Thought of  G.  W.  F.  Hegel.  Whitestone, NY: Griffon House, 1978.
Pelczynski,  Z. A. (ed.).  Hegel’s Political Philosophy:  Problems and  Perspectives. London:  Cambridge  University  Press, 1971.
___________.  The  State and Civil Society:  Studies  in  Hegel’s Political   Philosophy.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University Press, 1984.
Perkins, Robert L. (ed.).  History and System: Hegel’s  Philosophy of  History.  Albany: State University of New York Press, 1984.
Plamenatz, John.  Man and Society, vol. II.  London: Longman, 1963.
Plant, Raymond.  Hegel:  An Introduction. London: Allen & Unwin  Ltd., 1972; Basil Blackwell, 1983.
Pepperzak, Adriaan T.  Philosophy and Politics: A Commentary to the Preface  of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right.  Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff  Publishers,  1987.
Popper, Karl.  The Open Society and Its Enemies.  Princeton: Princeton  University Press, 1966.
Reyburn,  Hugh  A. The Ethical Theory of Hegel: A Study  of  the Philosophy  of Right. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1921.
Riedel,  Manfred. Between Tradition and Revolution: The  Hegelian  Transformation  of  Political  Philosophy.  Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press, 1984.
Ritter, Joachim. Hegel and the French Revolution:  Essays on ‘The  Philosophy  of  Right’.  trans.  Richard  Dien  Winfield, Cambridge, MA: The  MIT Press, 1982.
Rosenkranz,  Karl. Hegel As The National Philosopher of  Germany.  trans. G. S. Hall, St. Louis: Gray, Baker, 1874.
Rosenweig, Franz.  Hegel und der Staat.  Berlin/München, 1920;  Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1982.
Shanks, Andrew.  Hegel’s Political Theology.  Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press, 1991.
Shklar,  Judith  N.  Freedom and Independence:  A  Study  of  the Political   Ideas  of  Hegel’s  ‘Phenomenology  of  Mind’. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press, 1976.
Siebert,  Rudolf J. Hegel’s Concept of Marriage and  Family:  The Origin  of  Subjective  Freedom.  Washington,  D.C.:  The University Press of  America, 1979.
_______.  Hegel’s Philosophy of History: Theological,  Humanistic and  Scientific Elements. Washington: University  Press  of America, 1979.
Siep, Ludwig.  Anerkennung als Prinzip der praktische Philosophie: Zur Hegels  Jenaer Philosophie des Geistes.  München, Alber, 1979
Singer,  Peter.  Hegel. Past Masters  Series  (Oxford  University  Press, 1983).
Smith, Steven B.  Hegel’s Critique of Liberalism: Rights in Context.  Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1989.
Steinberger, Peter J. Logic and Politics: Hegel’s Philosophy  of Right.  New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982.
Stepelevich, L. S. & D. Lamb, (eds.).  Hegel’s Philosophy of Action. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1983.
Taylor, Charles. Hegel and Modern Society. New York and  London:  Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Tunick, Mark. Hegel’s Political Philosophy. Princeton  University  Press, 1992.
Verene, Donald  Phillip  (ed.).  Hegel’s  Social  and  Political Thought:  The  Philosophy  of  Objective  Spirit.  Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities  Press/Sussex: Harvester  Press, 1980.
Walsh,  William  Henry.  Hegelian  Ethics.  London/Melbourne:  Macmillan; New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1969.
Wazek, Norbert.  The Scottish Enlightenment and Hegel’s Account of ‘Civil  Society‘.  Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.
Weil, Eric.  Hegel et L’Etat.  Paris, 1950.
Westphal,  Merold.  History and Truth in  Hegel’s  Phenomenology.  Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1979.
Wilkins, Burleigh Taylor. Hegel’s Philosophy of History. Ithaca:  Cornell University Press, 1974.
Williams, Robert R. (ed.).  Beyond Liberalism and Communitarianism: Studies  in Hegel’s Philosophy of Right.  Proceedings  of the 15th Biennial  Meeting of the Hegel Society of America. SUNY Press, 2000.
Wood, Allen. Hegel’s Ethical Thought. Cambridge University Press,  1982.

Author Information
David A. Duquette
Email: david.duquette@snc.edu
St. Norbert College
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







