








Inconsistent Mathematics | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Inconsistent Mathematics
Inconsistent mathematics is  the study of commonplace mathematical objects, like sets, numbers, and functions, where some  contradictions are allowed. Tools from formal logic are used to make sure any contradictions are contained  and that the overall theories remain coherent. Inconsistent mathematics began as a response to  the set theoretic and semantic paradoxes such as Russell’s Paradox and the Liar Paradox—the response being that  these are interesting facts to study rather than problems to solve—and has so far been of  interest primarily to logicians and philosophers. More recently, though, the techniques of  inconsistent mathematics have been extended into wider mathematical fields, such as vector spaces and  topology, to study inconsistent structure for its own sake.
To be precise, a mathematical theory is a collection of sentences, the  theorems, which are deduced through logical proofs. A contradiction is a sentence together with its  negation, and a theory is inconsistent if it includes a contradiction.  Inconsistent mathematics considers inconsistent theories. As a result,  inconsistent mathematics requires careful attention to logic. In classical  logic, a  contradiction is always absurd: a contradiction implies everything. A theory  containing every sentence  is trivial. Classical logic therefore makes  nonsense of  inconsistency and is inappropriate  for inconsistent mathematics. Classical logic predicts that the  inconsistent has no structure. A paraconsistent logic guides proofs so that  contradictions do not necessarily lead to triviality. With a paraconsistent logic, mathematical  theories can be both inconsistent and interesting.
This article discusses inconsistent  mathematics as an active research program, with some of its history, philosophy, results and open  questions.
Table of Contents

Introduction

An Example


Background

Motivations
Perspectives
Methods
Proofs


Geometry
Set Theory
Arithmetic
Analysis
Computer Science
References and Further Reading

Further Reading
References



 1. Introduction
Inconsistent mathematics arose  as an independent discipline in the twentieth century, as the result of advances in formal logic.  In the nineteenth century, a great deal of extra emphasis was placed on formal rigor in proofs,  because various confusions and contradictions had appeared in the analysis of real numbers. To  remedy the situation required examining the inner workings of mathematical arguments in full  detail. Mathematics had always been conducted through step-by-step proofs, but  formal logic was intended to exert an extra degree of control over the proofs,  to ensure that all and only the  desired results would obtain. Various reconstructions of mathematical reasoning were advanced.
One proposal was classical  logic, pioneered by Giuseppe Peano, Gottlob Frege, and Bertrand Russell. Another was paraconsistent logic, arising out of the ideas of Jan Łukasiewicz and N. A. Vasil’év around 1910, and ﬁrst realized in full by Jaśkowski in 1948. The ﬁrst to suggest paraconsistency as a  ground for inconsistent mathematics  was Newton da Costa in Brazil in 1958. Since then, his school has carried on a  study of  paraconsistent mathematics. Another school, centered in Australia and most  associated with the  name of Graham Priest, has been active since the 1970s. Priest and Richard  Routley have forwarded  the thesis that some inconsistent theories are not only interesting, but true; this is  dialetheism.
Like any branch of  mathematics, inconsistent mathematics is the study of abstract structures using proofs. Paraconsistent logic offers  an unusually exacting proof guide that makes sure inconsistency does not get  out of hand. Paraconsistency is not a magic wand or panacea. It is a methodology for hard work.  Paraconsistency only helps us from getting lost, or falling into holes, when navigating through rough  terrain.
 a. An Example
Consider  a collection of objects. The collection has some size, the number of objects in  the collection. Now consider all the ways that these objects could be  recombined. For instance, if we are considering the collection {a, b},  then we have four possible recombinations: just a, just b, both a and b, or neither a nor b. In general, if a collection has κ members,  it has 2κ recombinations. It  is a theorem from the nineteenth century that, even if the collections in  question are infinitely large, still κ < 2κ, that is, the number of recombinations is  always strictly larger than the number of objects in the original collection.  This is Georg Cantor’s theorem.
Now consider the collection of  all objects, the universe, V.  This collection has some size,
|V|, and  quite clearly, being by definition the collection of everything, this size is  the absolutely largest size  any collection can be. (Any collection is contained in the universe by  definition, and so is no bigger  than the universe.) By Cantor’s theorem, though, the number of recombinations  of all the objects  exceeds the original number of objects. So the size of the recombinations is  both larger than,  and cannot be larger than, the universe,

This is Cantor’s paradox.  Inconsistent mathematics is unique in that, if rigorously argued, Cantor’s paradox is a theorem.
 2. Background
 a. Motivations
There  are at least two reasons to take an interest in inconsistent mathematics, which  roughly fall under the headings of pure and applied. The  pure reason is to study structure for its own sake. Whether or not it has  anything to do with physics, for example, Reimann geometry is beautiful.  If the ideas displayed in inconsistent mathematics are rich and elegant and  support unexpected developments that make deep connections, then  people will study it. G. H. Hardy’s A Mathematician’s  Apology (1940) makes a stirring case that pure mathematics  is inherently worth doing, and inconsistent mathematics provides some panoramic views  not available anywhere else.
The applied reasons derive  from a longstanding project at the foundations of mathematics. Around 1900, David Hilbert proposed a  program to ensure mathematical security. Hilbert wanted:

to formalize all mathematical  reasoning into an exact notation with algorithmic       rules;
to provide axioms for all  mathematical theories, such that no contradictions are       provable (consistency), and  all true facts are provable (completeness).

Hilbert’s program was (in  part) a response to a series of conceptual crises and responses from ancient Greece through Issac Newton and  G. W. Leibniz (see section 6 below) to Cantor. Each crisis arose due to the imposition of some objects that did not behave well in  the theories of the day—most dramatically in Russell’s paradox, which seems to be about logic  itself.
The inconsistency would not  have been such trouble, except the logic employed at that time was explosive: From a contradiction,  anything at all can be proved, so Russell’s paradox was a disaster. In 1931, Kurt Gödel’s theorems showed that  consistency is incompatible with completeness, that any complete foundation for mathematics  will be inconsistent. Hilbert’s program as stated is dead, and with it even more ambitious projects  like Frege-Russell logicism.
The failure of completeness  was hard to understand. Hilbert and many others had felt that any mathematical question should be  amenable to a mathematical answer. The motive to inconsistency, then, is that an inconsistent theory  can be complete. In light of Gödel’s result, an inconsistent foundation for mathematics is the  only remaining candidate for completeness.
 b. Perspectives
There are different ways to  view the place of inconsistent mathematics, ranging from the ideological to the  pragmatic.
The  most extreme view is that inconsistent mathematics is a rival to, or  replacement for, classical consistent mathematics. This seems to have been  Routley’s intent. Routley wanted to perfect an “ultramodal universal logic,” which would be a  flexible and powerful reasoning tool applicable to all subjects and in all situations. Routley  argued that some subjects and situations are intractably inconsistent, and so the universal  logic would be paraconsistent. He wanted such a logic to underly not only set theory and  arithmetic, but metaphysics, ecology and economics. (For example,  Routley and Meyer [1976] suggest that our economic woes are caused by using classical  logic in economic theory.) Rotuley (1980, p.927) writes:
There are whole mathematical  cities that have been closed off and  partially abandoned because of the outbreak of isolated contradictions. They  have become like modern  restorations of ancient cities, mostly just patched up ruins visited by tourists.
In order to sustain the  ultramodal challenge to classical logic it will have to be shown that even though leading features of  classical logic and theories have been rejected, … by going ultramodal one does not lose great chunks  of the modern mathematical megalopolis. … The strong ultramodal claim—not so  far vindicated—is the expectedly  brash one: we can do everything you can do, only better, and we can do more.
A  more restrained, but still unorthodox, view is of inconsistency as a  non-revisionary extension of classical theory. There is nothing wrong with  the classical picture of mathematics, says a proponent of  this position, except if we think that the classical picture exhausts all there  is to know. A useful analogy is the extension of the rational numbers by  the irrational numbers, to get the real numbers. Rational numbers are not wrong; they are just  not all the numbers. This moderate line is found in Priest’s  work. As articulated by da Costa (1974, p.498):
It would be as interesting to  study the inconsistent systems as, for instance, the non-euclidean geometries: we would  obtain a better idea of the nature of certain paradoxes, could have a better insight on the  connections amongst the various logical  principles necessary to obtain determinate results, etc.
In a similar vein, Chris Mortensen  argues that many important questions about mathematics are deeper than consistency or completeness.
A third view is even more  open-minded. This is to see all theories (within some basic constraints) as genuine, interesting and useful  for different purposes. Jc Beall and  Greg Restall have articulated a version of this view at length, which they call logical  pluralism.
 c. Methods
There are at least two ways to  go about mathematical research in this ﬁeld. The first is axiomatic. The second is model theoretic. The axiomatic approach is very pure.  We pick some axioms and inference rules, some starting assumptions and a logic,  and try to prove some theorems, with the aim of producing something on the model of Euclid, or Russell and  A. N. Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica.  This would be a way of obtaining  results in inconsistent mathematics independently, as if we were discovering  mathematics for  the first time. On the axiomatic approach there is no requirement that the same  theorems as classical  mathematics be proved. The hardest work goes into choosing a logic that is weak  enough to  be paraconsistent, but strong enough to get results, and formulating the  definitions and starting assumptions  in a way that is compatible with the logic. Little work has so far been done  using axiomatics.
By far more attention has been  given to the model theoretic approach, because it allows inconsistent theories  to “ride on the backs” of already developed consistent theories. The idea here  is to build up models—domains of  discourse, along with some relations between the objects in the domain, and an interpretation—and to  read off facts about the attached theory. A way to do this is to take a model from classical  mathematics, and to tinker with the interpretation, as in collapsed models of arithmetic (section 5 below). The model theoretic  approach shows how different logics interact with different mathematical structures. Mortensen has  followed through on this in a wide array of subjects, from the differential  calculus to vector spaces to topology to category theory, always asking: Under what conditions is  identity well-behaved? Let Φ(a) be  some sentence about an object a. Mortensen’s question is, if a = b holds in a theory, then is it the  case that Φ(a) exactly when Φ(b)?  It turns out that the answer to this question is extremely sensitive to small  changes in logic and  interpretations, and the answer can often be “no.”
Most of the results obtained  to date have been through the model theoretic approach, which has the advantage of maintaining a  connection with classical mathematics. The model theory approach has the same disadvantage, since it  is unlikely that radically new or robustly inconsistent ideas will arise from always beginning at  classical ideas.
 d. Proofs
It  is often thought that inconsistent mathematics faces a grave problem. A very common  mathematical proof technique is reductio ad absurdum. The concern, then, is  that if contradictions are not absurd—a fortiori, if a theory  has contradictions in it—then reductio is not possible. How can mathematics be done without  the most common sort of indirect proof?
The key to working  inconsistent mathematics is its logic. Much hinges on which paraconsistent  logic we are using. For instance, in da Costa’s systems, if a proposition is marked as  “consistent,” then reductio is allowed. Similarly, in most relevance logics, contraposition holds. And so forth. The reader is recommended to the bibliography for information on  paraconsistent logic. Independently of logic, the following may help.
In classical logic, all  contradictions are absurd; in a paraconsistent logic this is not so. But some things are absurd nevertheless.  Classically, contradiction and absurdity play the same role, of being a rejection device, a reason to rule  out some possibility. In inconsistent mathematics, there are still rejection devices. Anything that  leads to a trivial theory is to be rejected. More, suppose we are doing arithmetic and hypothesize that  Φ. But we ﬁnd that Φ has as a consequence that j=k for every number j, k. Now, we are looking for interesting inconsistent structure. This  may not be full triviality,  but 0 = 1 is nonsense. Reject Φ.
There are many consistent structures that mathematicians do  not, and will never, investigate, not  by force of pure logic but because they are not interesting. Inconsistent  mathematicians, irrespective of formal proof procedures, do the same.
 3. Geometry
Intuitively, M. C. Escher’s  “Ascending, Descending” is a picture of an impossible structure—a staircase that, if you walked continuously  along it, you would be going both up and down at the same time. Such a staircase may be called impossible.  The structure as a whole seems to present us with an inconsistent situation; formally, deﬁning down as not up,  then a person walking the staircase  would be going up and not up, at the same time, in the same way, a  contradiction. Nevertheless, the  picture is coherent and interesting. What sorts of mathematical properties does  it have? The answers  to this and more would be the start of an inconsistent geometry.
So far, the study has focused  on the impossible pictures themselves. A systematic study of these pictures is being carried out by the  Adelaide school. Two main results have been obtained. First, Bruno Ernst conjectured that one  cannot rotate an impossible picture. This was refuted in 1999 by Mortensen;  later, Quigley designed computer simulations of rotating impossible Necker cubes. Second, all  impossible pictures have been given a preliminary classiﬁcation of four basic forms: Necker cubes,  Reutersvärd triangles, Schuster pipes or fork, and Ernst stairs. It is thought that these forms  exhaust the universe of impossible pictures. If so, an important step towards a fuller geometry will have  been taken, since, for example,  a central theme in surface geometry is to classify surfaces as either convex,  flat, or concave.
Most recently, Mortensen and  Leishman (2009) have characterized Necker cubes, including chains of Neckers, using linear algebra.  Otherwise, algebraic and analytic methods have not yet been applied in the same way they have been in  classical geometry. Inconsistent equational expressions are not at the point where a robust answer  can be given to questions of length, area, volume etc. On the other hand, as the Adelaide school is  showing, the ancient Greeks do not have a monopoly on basic “circles drawn in sand” geometric  discoveries.
 4. Set Theory
Set  theory is one of the most investigated areas in inconsistent mathematics,  perhaps because there is the most consensus that the theories under  study might be true. It is here we have perhaps the  most important theorem for inconsistent mathematics, Ross Brady’s (2006) proof that  inconsistent set theory is non-trivial.
Set theory begins with two  basic assumptions, about the existence and uniqueness of sets:

A set is any collection of objects all sharing some property  Φ;
Sets with exactly the same members are identical.

These are the principles of comprehension (a.k.a. abstraction) and extensionality, respectively. In symbols,
x ∈ {z : Φ(z)} ↔ Φ(x);
x = y ↔ ∀z (z ∈ x ↔ z ∈ y).
Again, these assumptions seem  true. When the first assumption, the principle of comprehension, was proved to have inconsistent  consequences, this was felt to be highly paradoxical. The inconsistent mathematician asserts that a theory  implying an inconsistency is not automatically equivalent to a theory being wrong.
Newton da Costa was the ﬁrst  to develop an openly inconsistent set theory in the 1960s, based on Alonzo Church’s set theory with a  universal set, or what is similar, W. V. O. Quine’s new foundations. In this system, axioms like those of standard  set theory are assumed, along with the existence of a Russell set
R = {x : x ∉ x}
and a universal set
V = {x : x = x}.
Da Costa has deﬁned “russell  relations” and extended this foundation to model theory, arithmetic and analysis.
Note that V ∈ V,  since V = V.  This shows that some sets are self-membered. This also means that V ≠ R, by the axiom of extensionality. On the other hand,  in perhaps the first truly combinatorial theorem of inconsistent mathematics, Arruda and Batens (1982) proved

where ∪R is  the union of R,  the set of all the members of members of R. This says that every set is a member of a non-self-membered set. The  Arruda-Batens result was obtained with a very weak logic, and shows that there are real set  theoretical theorems to be learned about inconsistent objects. Arruda further showed that

where P (X)  denotes all the subsets of X and ⊆ is the subset relation.
Routley, meanwhile, in 1977  took up his own dialetheic logic and used it on a full comprehension principle. Routley went as far as to  allow a comprehension principle where the set being defined could appear in its own definition. A  more mundane example of a set appearing in its own defining condition could be the set of  “critics who only criticize each other.” One of Routley’s examples is the ultimate inconsistent set,
x ∈ Z ↔ x ∉ Z.
Routley indicated that the  usual axioms of classical set theory can be proven as theorems—including a version of the axiom of choice—and  began work towards a full reconstruction of Cantorian set theory.
The crucial step in the  development of Routley’s set theory came in 1989 when Brady adapted an idea from 1971 to produce a model  of dialetheic set theory, showing that it is not trivial. Brady proves that there is a model in which  all the axioms and consequences of set theory are true, including some contradictions like  Russell’s, but in which some sentences are not true.  By the soundness  of the semantics, then, some sentences are not provable, and the theory is  decidedly paraconsistent.  Since then Brady has considerably reﬁned and expanded his result.
A stream of papers considering  models for paraconsistent set theory has been coming out of Europe as well. Olivier Esser has determined  under what conditions the axiom of choice is true, for example. See Hinnion and Libert (2008) for an opening into this work.
Classical set theory, it is  well known, cannot answer some fundamental questions about inﬁnity, Cantor’s continuum hypothesis being  the most famous. The theory is incomplete, just as Gödel predicted it would be. Inconsistent  set theory, on the other hand, appears to be able to answer some of these questions. For instance,  consider a large cardinal hypothesis,  that there are cardinals λ such that for any κ < λ, also 2κ < λ. The existence of large  cardinals is undecidable by classical set theory. But recall the universe, as we did in the  introduction (section 1),  and its size |V|. Almost obviously, |V| is such large a cardinal, just  because everything is smaller than it. Taking the full  sweep of sets into  account, the hypothesis is true.
Set theory is the lingua  franca of mathematics and the home of mathematical study of infinity. Since Zeno’s paradoxes it has been  obvious that there is something paradoxical about infinity. Since Russell’s paradox, it has been  obvious that there is something paradoxical about set theory. So a rigorously developed paraconsistent  set theory serves two purposes. First, it provides a reliable (inconsistent)  foundation for mathematics, at least in the sense of providing the basic  toolkit for expressing  mathematical ideas. Second, the mathematics of infinity can be refined to cover  the inconsistent cases like  Cantor’s paradox, and cases that have yet to be considered. See the references for what has been done in inconsistent  set theory so far; what can be still be done in remains one of the discipline’s most exciting  open questions.
 5. Arithmetic
An inconsistent arithmetic may  be considered an alternative or variant on the standard theory, like a  non-euclidean geometry. Like set theory, though, there are some who think that  an inconsistent arithmetic may be  true, for the following reason.
Gödel, in 1931, found a true  sentence G about numbers such that, if G can be decided by arithmetic, then arithmetic is  inconsistent. This means that any consistent theory of numbers will always be an incomplete fragment of  the whole truth about numbers. Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem states that, if arithmetic is  consistent, then that very fact is  unprovable in arithmetic. Gödel’s  incompleteness theorems state that all consistent theories are terminally  unable to process everything  that we know is true about the numbers. Priest has argued in a series of papers  that this  means that the whole truth about numbers is inconsistent.
The standard axioms of  arithmetic are Peano’s, and their consequences—the standard theory of arithmetic—is called P A. The standard model of arithmetic  is N = {0, 1, 2, …}, zero and its successors. N is a model of arithmetic because it makes all the  right sentences true. In 1934 Skolem  noticed that there are other (consistent) models that make all the same  sentences true, but  have a different shape—namely, the non-standard models include blocks of  objects after all the standard  members of N.  The consistent non-standard models are all extensions of the standard model, models containing extra  objects. Inconsistent models of arithmetic are the natural dual, where the standard model is itself an  extension of a more basic structure, which also makes all the right sentences true.
Part of this idea goes back to  C. F. Gauss, who ﬁrst introduced the idea of a modular arithmetic, like that we use to tell the time on  analog clocks: On a clock face, 11 + 2 = 1, since the hands of the clock revolve around 12. In  this case we say that 11 + 2 is congruent to 1 modulo 12. An important discovery in the late 19th  century was that arithmetic facts are reducible to facts about a successor relation starting from a  base element. In modular arithmetic, a successor function is wrapped around itself. Gauss no doubt  saw this as a useful technical device. Inconsistent number theorists have considered taking such  congruences much more seriously.
Inconsistent arithmetic was  ﬁrst investigated by Robert Meyer in the 1970’s. There he took the paraconsistent logic R and added to it axioms governing successor, addition,  multiplication, and  induction, giving the system R#.  In 1975 Meyer proved that his arithemtic is non-trivial, because R# has models. Most notably, R# has ﬁnite models with a two  element domain {0, 1}, with the successor function moving in a very tight circle over the elements. Such models make all the theorems of R# true, but keep equations like 0 =  1 just false.
The importance of such ﬁnite  models is just this: The models can be represented within the theory itself, showing that a  paraconsistent arithmetic can prove its own non-triviality. In the case of Meyer’s arithemetic, R# has a ﬁnitary consistency proof,  formalizable in R#.  Thus, in non-classical  contexts, Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem loses its bite. Since 1976  relevance logicians  have studied the relationship between R# and PA.  Their hope was that R#  contains PA as a subtheory and could replace PA as a stronger, more genuine arithmetic. The outcome of  that project  for our purposes is the development of inconsistent models of arithmetic.  Following Dunn, Meyer,  Mortensen, and Friedman, these models have now been extensively studied by  Priest, who bases his work not on the relevant logic R but on the more ﬂexible logic LP.
Priest has found inconsistent  arithmetic to have an elegant general structure. Rather than describe the details, here is an  intuitive example. We imagine the standard model of arithmetic, up to an inconsistent element
n = n + 1.
This n is suspected to be a very, very large  number, “without physical reality or psychological meaning.” Depending on your tastes,  it is the greatest ﬁnite number or the least inconsistent number. We further imagine that for j, k > n, we have j=k. If  in the classical model j≠ k, then this is true too; hence we have  an inconsistency, j=k and j≠ k.  Any fact true of numbers greater  than n are  true of n, too, because after n,  all numbers are identical to n. No facts from the consistent model are lost. This  technique gives a collapsed model of arithmetic.
Let T be all the sentences in the language of arithmetic  that are true of N;  then let T(n) similarly be all the sentences true of the numbers up  to n, an inconsistent  number theory. Since T(n) does not contradict T about any  numbers below n, if n > 0 then T(n) is non-trivial. (It does not prove 0  = 1, for instance.) The  sentences of T(n) are representable in T(n), and  its language contains a truth predicate for T(n). The  theory can prove itself sound. The Gödel sentence for T(n) is provable in T(n),  as is its negation, so the theory  is inconsistent. Yet as Meyer proved, the non-triviality of T(n) can be established in T(n) by a finite procedure.
Most striking with respect to  Hilbert’s program, there is a way, in principle, to figure out for any arithmetic sentence Φ whether or  not Φ holds, just by checking all the numbers up to n.  This means  that T(n) is decidable, and that there must be axioms guaranteed  to deliver every truth about  the collapsed model. This means that an inconsistent arithmetic is coherent and  complete.
 6. Analysis
Newton and Leibniz  independently developed the calculus in the 17th century. They presented ingenious solutions to outstanding  problems (rates of change, areas under curves) using infinitesimally small  quantities. Consider a curve and a tangent to the curve. Where the tangent line  and the curve intersect can be  though of as a point. If the curve is the trajectory of some object in motion, this point is an instant of  change. But a bit of thought shows that it must be a little more than a point—otherwise, as a measure  a rate of change, there would be no change at all, any more than a photograph is in motion. There  must be some smudge. On the other hand, the instant must be less than any finite quantity,  because there are inﬁnitely many such instants. An infinitesimal would  respect both these concerns, and with these provided, a circle could be  construed as infinitely many  infinitesimal tangent segments.
Infinitesimals were essential,  not only for building up the conceptual steps to inventing calculus, but in getting the right answers. Yet  it was pointed out, most famously by Bishop George Berkeley, that infinitesimals were poorly understood  and were being used inconsistently in equations. Calculus in its original form was outright  inconsistent. Here is an example. Suppose we are differentiating the polynomial f(x)  =ax2+bx+c. Using the original definition of a  derivative,

In the example, ε is an infinitesimal. It marks a small but non-trivial  neighborhood around x, and can be divided by, so it is not zero.  Nevertheless, by the end ε has simply disappeared. This example suggests that  paraconsistent logic is more than a useful technical device. The example shows that Leibniz was  reasoning with contradictory information, and yet did not infer everything. On the contrary, he got  the right answer. Nor is this an isolated incident. Mathematicians seem able to  sort through “noise” and derive interesting truths, even out of contradictory  data sets.  To capture this, Brown and Priest (2004) have developed a method they call “chunk and  permeate” to  model reasoning in the early calculus. The idea is to take all the information,  including say ε = 0 and ε ≠ 0,  and break it into smaller chunks. Each chunk is consistent, without conflicting information, and one can reason using  classical logic inside of a chunk. Then a permeation relation is defined which controls the  information flow between chunks. As long as the permeation relation is carefully defined, conclusions  reached in one chunk can ﬂow to another chunk and enter into reasoning chains there. Brown and  Priest propose this as a model, or rational reconstruction, of what Newton and Leibniz were doing.
Another, more direct tack for  inconsistent mathematics is to work with infinitesimal numbers themselves. There are classical  theories of infinitesimals due to Abraham Robinson (the hyperreals), and J. H. Conway (the surreals). Mortensen has  worked with differential equations using hyperreals. Another approach is from category theory.  Tiny line segments (“linelets”) of length ϵ are considered, such that ϵ2 = 0 but it is not the case that ϵ = 0.  In this theory, it is also not the case that ϵ ≠ 0,  so the logical law of excluded  middle fails. The category theory approach is the most like inconsistent mathematics, then, since it involves  a change in the logic. However, the most obvious way to use linelets with  paraconsistent logics, to say that both ϵ = 0 and ϵ ≠ 0 are true, means we are dividing by  0 and so is probably too coarse to  work.
In general the concept of  continuity is rich for inconsistent developments. Moments of change, the ﬂow of time, and the very  boundaries that separate objects have all been considered from the standpoint of inconsistent  mathematics.
 7. Computer Science
The questions posed by David  Hilbert can be stated in very modern language:
Is there a computer program to  decide, for any arithmetic statement, whether or not the statement can be  proven? Is there a program to decide, for any arithmetic statement, whether or  not the statement is true? We have  already seen that Gödel’s theorems devastated Hilbert’s program, answering these questions in the  negative. However, we also saw that inconsistent arithmetic overcomes Gödel’s  results and can give a positive answer to these questions. It is natural to  extend these  ideas into computer science.
Hilbert’s program demands  certain algorithms—a step-by-step  procedure that can be carried out without  insight or creativity. A Turing machine runs programs, some of which halt after  a ﬁnite number  of steps, and some of which keep running forever. Is there a program E that can tell us in advance whether a given program will halt or not? If there is, then consider the  program E*,  which exists if E does by deﬁning it as follows. When considering some program x, E* halts  if and only if x keeps running when given input x. Then
E* halts for E*
if and only if
E* does not halt for E*,
which implies a contradiction.  Turing concluded that there is no E*, and so there is no E—that there cannot be a general  decision procedure.
Any program that can decide in  advance the behavior of all other programs will be inconsistent.
A paraconsistent system can  occasionally produce contradictions as an output, while its procedure remains  completely deterministic. (It is not that the machine occasionally does and  does not produce  an output.) There is, in principle, no reason a decision program cannot exist.  Richard Sylvan  identifies as a central idea of paraconsistent computability theory the  development of machines “to compute diagonal functions that are classically  regarded as uncomputable.” He discusses a number of rich possibilities for a non-classical  approach to algorithms, including a fixed-point result on the set of all algorithmic functions, and a  prototype for dialetheic machines.
Important results have been  obtained by the paraconsistent school in Brazil—da Costa and Doria in 1994, and Agudelo and Carnielli in  2006. Like quantum computation, though, at present the theory of paraconsistent machines  outstrips the hardware. Machines that can compute more than Turing machines await advances in  physics.
 8. References and Further Reading
 a. Further Reading
Priest’s In  Contradiction (2006) is  the best place to start. The second edition contains material on set theory, continuity, and  inconsistent arithmetic (summarizing material previously published in papers).  A critique of inconsistent arithmetic is in Shapiro (2002). Franz Berto’s book, How to Sell a Contradiction (2007), is harder  to find, but also an excellent and perhaps more gentle introduction.
Some of da Costa’s  paraconsistent mathematics is summarized in the interesting collection Frontiers  of Paraconsistency (2000)—the proceedings of a world congress  on paraconsistency edited by Batens et al. More details are in Jacquette’s Philosophy of Logic (2007) handbook; Beall’s paper in that volume covers issues about truth and  inconsistency.
Those wanting more advanced  mathematical topics should consult Mortensen’s Inconsistent Mathematics (1995).  For impossible geometry, his recent pair of papers with Leishman are a  promising advance.  His school’s website is well worth a visit. Brady’s Universal  Logic (2006) is the most worked-out paraconsistent set theory to date, but not for  the faint of heart.
If you can find it, read  Routley’s seminal paper, “Ultralogic as Universal?”, reprinted as an appendix  to his magnum opus, Exploring Meinong’s  Jungle (1980). Before too much  confusion arises, note that Richard Routley and Richard Sylvan, whose  posthumous work is collected by Hyde and Priest in Sociative Logics and their Applications (2000), in a selfless feat of  inconsistency, are the same person.
For the how-to of  paraconsistent logics, consult both the entry on relevance and paraconsistency  in Gabbay & Günthner’s Handbook of Philosophical  Logic volume 6 (2002), or Priest’s textbook An  Introduction to Non-Classical Logic (2008). For paraconsistent logic and its philosophy more  generally see Routley, Priest and Norman’s 1989 edited collection. The collection The Law of Non-Contradiction (Priest et al. 2004) discusses the philosophy of  paraconsistency, as does Priest’s Doubt  Truth be a Liar (2006).
For the broader philosophical  issues associated with inconsistent mathematics, especially in applications  (for example, consequences for realism and antirealism debates), see Mortensen (2009a) and Colyvan (2009).
 b. References

Arruda, A. I. & Batens, D. (1982). “Russell’s set versus the universal set in paraconsistent set theory.” Logique et Analyse, 25, pp. 121-133.
Batens, D., Mortensen, C. , Priest, G., & van Bendegem, J-P., eds. (2000). Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 Berto, Francesco (2007). How to Sell a Contradiction. Studies  in Logic v. 6. College Publications.
 Brady, Ross (2006). Universal Logic. CSLI Publications.
 Brown, Bryson &   Priest, G. (2004). “Chunk and permeate i: the inﬁnitesimal calculus.” Journal of Philosophical Logic, 33, pp. 379–88.
 Colyvan, Mark (2008). “The  ontological commitments of inconsistent theories.” Philosophical Studies, 141(1):115 – 23, October.
Colyvan, Mark (2009). “Applying Inconsistent Mathematics,” in O. Bueno and Ø. Linnebo (eds.), New Waves in Philosophy of Mathematics, Palgrave MacMillan, pp. 160-72
da Costa,  Newton C. A. (1974). “On the  theory of inconsistent formal systems.” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 15, pp. 497– 510.
 da Costa, Newton C. A. (2000).  Paraconsistent mathematics. In Batens et al. 2000, pp. 165–180.
 da Costa,  Newton C.A., Krause, D´ecio & Bueno, Ot´avio (2007). “Paraconsistent logics and paraconsistency.” In  Jacquette 2007,  pp. 791 – 912.
Gabbay, Dov M. & Günthner, F. eds. (2002). Handbook of Philosophical Logic, 2nd Edition, volume 6,  Kluwer.
 Hinnion,Roland & Libert, Thierry  (2008). “Topological models for extensional partial set theory.” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 49(1).
 Hyde, Dominic & Priest, G., eds. (2000). Sociative  Logics and their Applications: Essays by the Late Richard Sylvan. Ashgate.
 Jacquette, Dale, ed. (2007). Philosophy of Logic. Elsevier: North  Holland.
 Libert, Thierry (2004). “Models for  paraconsistent set theory.” Journal  of Applied Logic, 3.
 Mortensen, Chris (1995). Inconsistent Mathematics. Kluwer  Academic Publishers.
 Mortensen, Chris (2009a).  “Inconsistent mathematics: Some philosophical implications.” In A.D. Irvine,  ed., Handbook of the Philosophy of Science Volume  9: Philosophy of Mathematics. North Holland/Elsevier.
 Mortensen, Chris (2009b). “Linear  algebra representation of necker cubes II: The routley functor and necker  chains.” Australasian  Journal of Logic, 7.
 Mortensen, Chris & Leishman, Steve  (2009). “Linear algebra representation of necker cubes I: The crazy crate.” Australasian Journal of Logic, 7.
 Priest, Graham, Beall, J.C. & Armour-Garb, B., eds. (2004). The  Law of Non-Contradiction. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
 Priest, Graham (1994). “Is  arithmetic consistent?” Mind,  103.
 Priest, Graham (2000).  “Inconsistent models of arithmetic, II: The general case.” Journal of Symbolic Logic,  65, pp. 1519–29.
 Priest, Graham (2002). “Paraconsistent logic.” In Gabbay and  Günthner, eds. 2002, pp.  287–394.
Priest, Graham (2006a). Doubt Truth Be A Liar. Oxford University Press.
Priest, Graham (2006b). In Contradiction: A Study of the  Transconsistent. Oxford University Press. second edition.
Priest, Graham (2008). An Introduction to Non-Classical  Logic. Cambridge University Press, second edition.
 Priest, Graham,   Routley, R. & Norman, J. eds. (1989).  Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on the Inconsistent. Philosophia Verlag.
 Routley, Richard (1977).  “Ultralogic as universal?” Relevance  Logic Newsletter, 2, pp. 51–89. Reprinted in Routley 1980.
 Routley, Richard (1980). “Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and  Beyond.” Philosophy Department, RSSS, Australian National University, 1980. Interim Edition,  Departmental Monograph number 3.
 Routley, Richard & Meyer, R. K. (1976). “Dialectical logic, classical logic and the consistency of the world.” Studies in Soviet Thought, 16, pp. 1–25.
 Shapiro, Stewart (2002). “Incompleteness and  inconsistency.” Mind, 111, pp. 817 – 832.

Author Information
Zach Weber
Email: zweber@unimelb.edu.au
University of Sydney, University of Melbourne
Australia





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







