








Qualia | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Qualia
Qualia are the subjective or qualitative properties of  experiences. What it feels like, experientially, to see a red rose is different  from what it feels like to see a yellow rose.  Likewise for hearing a musical note played by a piano and hearing the  same musical note played by a tuba. The  qualia of these experiences are what give  each of them its  characteristic “feel” and also what distinguish them from one another. Qualia have traditionally been thought to be  intrinsic qualities of experience that are directly available to introspection. However, some philosophers offer theories of  qualia that deny one or both of those features.
The term “qualia” (singular: quale and pronounced “kwol-ay”) was introduced into the philosophical literature in its  contemporary sense in 1929 by C. I. Lewis in a discussion of sense-data theory.  As Lewis used the term, qualia were properties of sense-data  themselves. In contemporary usage, the  term has been broadened to refer more generally to properties of experience. Paradigm examples of experiences with qualia  are perceptual experiences (including nonveridical perceptual experiences like  hallucinations) and bodily sensations (such as  pain, hunger, and itching). Emotions (like anger, envy, or fear) and moods  (like euphoria, ennui, or anxiety) are also usually taken to have qualitative  aspects.
Qualia are often referred to as the phenomenal properties of experience, and experiences that have  qualia are referred to as being phenomenally  conscious. Phenomenal consciousness is often contrasted with intentionality (that is,  the representational aspects of mental states). Some mental states—for example, perceptual  experiences—clearly have both phenomenal and intentional aspects. My visual experience of a peach on the kitchen  counter represents the peach and also has an experiential feel. Less clear is whether all phenomenal states  also have intentional aspects and whether all intentional states also have  phenomenal aspects. Is there really  something that it is like to have the belief—even the occurrent belief—that  there is a peach on the counter? What  could be the representational content of the experience  of an orgasm? Along these lines,  the nature of the relationship between phenomenal consciousness and  intentionality has recently generated considerable philosophical  discussion. Some philosophers think that  phenomenal consciousness reduces to intentional content, while others think  that the reductive relationship goes in the other direction. Still other philosophers deny both claims.
From the standpoint of introspection, the existence of  qualia seems indisputable. It has,  however, proved remarkably difficult to accommodate qualia within a physicalist  account of the mind. Many philosophers  have argued that qualia cannot be identified with or reduced to anything  physical, and that any attempted explanation of the world in solely physicalist  terms would leave qualia out. Thus, over  the last several decades, qualia have been the source of considerable  controversy in philosophy of mind.
Table of Contents

 The Hard Problem of Consciousness
 Qualia and Functionalism
 Qualia and Physicalism
 Qualia and Representationalism
 Eliminativism about Qualia
 Naturalistic Dualism
 References and Further Reading

1. The Hard Problem of Consciousness
One of the most fundamental questions about the mind  concerns its relationship to the body (and, more specifically, its relationship  to the brain). This has become known as  the mind-body problem. Although it dates  back at least to Plato‘s Phaedo,  the problem was thrust into philosophical prominence by René Descartes.  In taking up these issues in his Meditations  on First Philosophy, Descartes argued for a dualist view according to which the mind and  the body are fundamentally different kinds of things: While the body is a material thing existing  in space, the mind is an immaterial thing, one that altogether lacks spatial  extension. In contrast to dualists, the materialists claim that everything that  exists must be made of matter.  Historically, materialism was associated with Thomas Hobbes. Starting in the twentieth century, this  position has become known as physicalism,  the claim that everything that exists—all things and all properties of  things—must fundamentally be physical. Most philosophers today endorse some  form of physicalism.
For some aspects of consciousness, it is relatively  straightforward to see how they can be accommodated within a physicalist  picture. Consider, for example, our  abilities to access, report on, and attend to our own mental states. It seems reasonable to assume that as  neuroscience progresses and we learn more and more about the brain, we will be  able to explain these abilities in terms of neural mechanisms. Aspects of consciousness that can be  explained in this way constitute what David Chalmers has referred to as the easy problems of consciousness. The assertion that these problems are easy  does not mean that they have already been solved or even that we are close to  finding solutions. As Chalmers  explicitly notes, we should think of “easy” as a relative term. In most cases, we are still nowhere near  having a complete explanation of the relevant phenomena. Rather, what makes the problems easy is that,  even though the solutions to these problems probably still require decades or  even centuries of difficult empirical investigation, we nonetheless have every  reason to believe that we can reach them using the standard methods of  cognitive science and neuroscience. (Chalmers 1995, 1996) Solving the problem of attention, for  example, simply awaits the empirical identification of a relevant neural  mechanism. But what kind of mechanism  could account for qualia? Though we  strongly suspect that the physical system of the brain gives rise to qualia, we  do not have any understanding of how it does so. The problem of accounting for qualia has thus  become known, following Chalmers, as the hard  problem of consciousness.
The hard problem of consciousness relates quite closely to  what Joseph Levine had previously referred to as the explanatory gap. Given the scientific identification of heat with  the motion of molecules, there is no further explanation that needs to be  given: “our knowledge of chemistry and physics makes intelligible how it is  that something like the motion of molecules could play the causal role we  associate with heat…. Once we understand how this causal role is carried out  there is nothing more we need to understand.”  (Levine 1983) In contrast, when  we are told that pain is to be identified with some neural or functional state,  while we have learned quite a bit, there is still something left unexplained.  Suppose, for example, that we precisely identify the neural mechanism that  accounts for pain—C-fiber firing, let’s say.  Still, a further question would remain: Why does our experience of pain  feel the way that it does? Why does  C-fiber firing feel like this, rather  than like that, or rather than  nothing at all? Identifying pain with  C-fiber firing fails to provide us with a complete explanation along the lines  of the identification of heat with the motion of molecules.
Some philosophers have claimed that closing the explanatory  gap and fully accounting for qualia is not merely hard but rather impossible.  This position, often referred to as new  mysterianism, is most closely associated with Colin McGinn. According to McGinn, we will in principle  never be able to resolve the mystery of what it is about the brain that  accounts for qualia. (McGinn 1989) A similar, though slightly weaker, view is  held by Thomas Nagel. According to  Nagel, we currently do not have the conceptual apparatus necessary to even  begin to understand how physicalism might be true. In order to solve the hard problem of  consciousness, we would have to undergo a complete overhaul of our entire  conceptual apparatus—a conceptual revolution so radical that we cannot even  begin to conceive what the resulting concepts would be like. (Nagel 1998) But other philosophers reject  the pessimism of the new mysterians as unwarranted or premature. Chalmers, for example, suggests that an  explanation of how consciousness relates to the physical, even if it does not  reduce to it, may well be enlightening.  (See Chalmers 1996, 379)
It is perhaps easiest to see why the hard problem of  consciousness is so hard by looking at particular attempts to account for  qualia. The following three sections  review three different theories of mental states—functionalism, physicalism,  and representationalism—and the problems they face in accounting for qualia.
 2. Qualia and Functionalism
The contemporary debate about qualia was framed in large  part by discussions of functionalism in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Some  attention had earlier been paid to qualia in connection with type identity  theory, the  view that mental state types could be identified with physical state types (for  example, the mental state type pain might be identified to the neural state  type C-fiber firing). But it was with  the emergence of functionalism as a theory of mind that the debate about qualia  began to heat up.
The intuition underlying the functionalist view is that the function  of a mental state is its defining feature.  Mental states are defined in terms of the causal role that they play in  the entire system of the mind—that is, in terms  of their causal relations to sensory stimuli, behavioral outputs, and other  mental states. By defining mental states  in this way, functionalism avoids many of the objections aimed at philosophical  behaviorism, an early 20th  century theory of mental states that defines them simply in terms of their  input-output relations. Moreover,  because a causal role can be defined independently of its physical realization  (that is, because functional states are multiply realizable),  functionalism avoids many of the objections aimed at the type identity  theory. Rather than define pain in terms  of C-fiber firing, functionalism defines pain in terms of the causal role it  plays in our mental life: causing avoidance behavior, warning us of danger,  etc., in response to certain environmental stimuli.
As plausible as functionalism may seem, however, it has long  faced the charge that it is unable to account adequately for qualia. The causal role of a state seems to come  apart from its qualitative aspects. To  show this, opponents of functionalism have mounted two different kinds of  arguments: (1) those aiming to show that two  systems might be functionally identical even though only one of them has any  qualia at all, and (2) those aiming to show that  two systems might be functionally identical even though they have vastly  different qualia from one another.
Falling in the first of these two categories, the absent qualia argument tries to establish that a system could instantiate the  functional state of, say, pain without having any pain qualia. Ned Block originated this objection to  functionalism with the thought experiment of the homunculi-headed robot (Block  1978). Suppose a billion people were  recruited to take part in a giant experiment.  Each individual is given a very small task to perform—for example, to  press a certain button when a certain light comes on. In doing so, each of them plays the causal  role of an individual neuron, with the communications between them mirroring  the synaptic connections among the neurons.  Now suppose that signals from this network of people are appropriately  connected to a robot body, so that the signals from the network cause the robot  to move, talk, etc. If the network were  set up in the right way, then it seems in principle possible that it could be  functionally equivalent to a human brain.  However, intuitively speaking, it seems very odd to attribute qualia to  the robot. Though it might be in a state  functionally equivalent to the state you are in when you have a pain in your  right toe, it seems implausible to suppose that the robot is feeling pain. In fact, it seems implausible to suppose that  the robot could have any phenomenal experience whatsoever. Thus, if the absent qualia objection is  right, we can have functional equivalence without qualitative equivalence, so  qualia escape functional explanation.
A related objection, falling into  the second category, is the inverted qualia argument against functionalism, which arises  from considering a possibility originally suggested  by John Locke. Suppose that two people, Norma  and Abby, are   qualitatively inverted with respect to one another. Both of them refer to stop signs, Coke cans,  and Elmo as “red,”  and both refer to sugar snap peas, Heineken bottles, and Kermit the Frog as “green.” But Abby’s phenomenal  experience when she sees a Coke can is like Norma’s phenomenal experience when  she sees a Heineken bottle. When Norma  sees the Coke can, she has a reddish experience; when  Abby sees the Coke can, she has a greenish experience. Likewise, when Norma sees the Heineken  bottle, she has a greenish experience; but when  Abby sees the Heineken bottle, she has a reddish experience. Qualitatively, the two are inverted relative  to each other.
Though most people find this scenario conceptually coherent,  the functionalist can make no sense of this inversion. Abby and Norma both  refer to the Coke can as “red.” They both  indicate that it is the same color as stop signs and ripe tomatoes. Functionally speaking, there is nothing to  differentiate the states that Abby and Norma are in when they see the Coke  can. But, by hypothesis, they have  different qualitative experiences when they see the Coke can. Thus, it looks as if functional definitions  of mental states leave out the qualitative aspects of mental states.
In response to these qualia-related objections, the  functionalist might try to argue that we have not really imagined the scenarios  that we think we have imagined. For  example, can we really imagine what would happen if we had a billion people  participating in a network to operate the robot? (In fact, even a billion people would not be  enough to simulate the human brain, which is estimated to have 100 billion  neurons.) Along these lines, William  Lycan (1995, 50-52) argues that our intuition that the robot does not have qualia  stems from a misguided focus on each microscopic part of the system rather than  on the macroscopic system as a whole.  Likewise, the functionalist might offer considerations to show that,  contrary to how it first seems, the notion of behaviorally undetectable qualia  inversion is not conceptually coherent after all. For example, because saturated yellow is  brighter than saturated blue, the inversion between Norma and Abby would be  detectable if they were both shown patches of saturated blue and saturated  yellow and asked which was brighter.  (See Tye 1995, 203-4)
Alternatively, if the functionalist cannot convince us  that the absent qualia and inverted qualia scenarios are incoherent, he might  instead narrow the scope of the theory, restricting it to mental states that  are not qualitative. As John Haugeland argues, we can “segregate”  the  states that can be  functionalized from the  states that cannot: “if felt qualities are fundamentally  different, so be it; explaining them is somebody else’s business.” (Haugeland 1978, 222) However, while this kind of segregation might  save functionalism as a theory of cognition, it does so only by ignoring the  hard problem of consciousness.
 3. Qualia and Physicalism
As described above, the absent qualia objection and the  inverted qualia objection specifically target functionalism, but they can be  generalized to apply to physicalism more broadly. For the inverted qualia argument, the generalization  is straightforward. Just as we can  conceive of Abby and Norma being in functionally identical states, it does not  seem implausible to suppose that their brains might be physically identical to  one another. If so, then just as qualia  escape functional explanation, they also escape physical explanation.
The generalization is less straightforward with the absent  qualia argument. The homunculi-headed  robot, though functionally identical to a human being, is not physically  identical to a human being. However, in  recent work, Chalmers has argued that we can conceive of what he terms “zombies”—beings  who are molecule-for-molecule identical with phenomenally conscious beings but  who are not themselves phenomenally conscious.  In appearance and action, a conscious being and his zombie replica would  be indistinguishable, but for the zombie, as Chalmers says, “all is dark  inside.” (Chalmers 1996, 96) When Zack  and Zombie Zack each take a bite of chocolate cake, they each have the same  reaction—they smile, exclaim how good it is, lick their lips, and reach for  another forkful. But whereas Zack, a  phenomenally conscious being, is having a distinctive (and delightful)  qualitative experience while tasting the chocolate cake, Zombie Zack is  experiencing nothing at all. This  suggests that Zack’s consciousness is a further fact about him, over and above  all the physical facts about him (since all those physical facts are true of  Zombie Zack as well). Consciousness,  that is, must be nonphysical.
Chalmers’ argument has the standard form of a conceivability  argument, moving from a claim about conceivability to a claim about  metaphysical possibility. Though zombies  are probably not physically possible—not possible in a world that has laws of nature like our world—the  fact that they are conceivable is taken to show that there is a metaphysically possible world in which  they could exist. This form of argument  is not entirely uncontroversial (see, for example,  Hill and McLaughlin 1999), and there is also considerable debate about whether  Chalmers is right that zombies are conceivable (see, for  example, Searle 1997). But if  Chalmers is right about the conceivability of zombies, and if this  conceivability implies their metaphysical possibility, then it would follow  that physicalism is false.
An early and influential discussion of the general problem  that qualia pose for physicalism can be found in Thomas Nagel’s seminal paper,  “What is it like to be a Bat?” (Nagel 1974).  Although it might be that not all living  creatures  have phenomenal experiences, we can be pretty confident  that bats do—after all, they are mammals who engage in fairly sophisticated  behavior. In Nagel’s words, there is  something that it is like to be a bat.  But the physiology of bats is radically different from the physiology of  human beings, and the way they interact with the world is radically different  from the way that we interact with the world.  What we do via vision, they do via echolocation (sonar). We detect objects by sight; bats detect  objects by sending out high-frequency signals and detecting the reflections  from nearby objects. Because this way of  perceiving the world is so different from our own, it seems that their  perceptual experiences must be vastly different from our own—so different, in  fact, that Nagel argues that it is unimaginable from our perspective. We, who are not bats, cannot know what it is  like to be a bat. Qualia are inherently  subjective, and as such, Nagel argues that they cannot be accommodated by  physicalism: “Every subjective phenomenon is essentially connected with a  single point of view, and it seems inevitable that an objective, physical  theory will abandon that point of view.”  (Nagel 1974, 520)
Related worries about physicalism and qualia have been  forcefully developed by Frank Jackson in his well-known thought experiment  involving Mary, a brilliant color scientist who has spent her entire life in a  black-and-white room. (Jackson 1982)  Although she has normal color vision, her confinement has prevented her  from ever having any color sensations.  While in the room, Mary has studied color science through black and white textbooks, television, etc. And in  that way she has learned the complete physical story about color experience,  including all the physical facts about the brain and its visual system. She knows all the physical facts about  color. But she has never seen anything  in color. Now suppose that Mary is one  day released from her room and presented with a ripe tomato. What should we imagine happens? Most people  have the very strong intuition that Mary learns something from this perceptual  experience. “Aha!” she might say. “Now I  finally know what the color red is like.”
The Mary case is the centerpiece of Jackson’s knowledge  argument against physicalism. While in the room, Mary knew all the physical  facts about color, including the color red.  When she is released from the room, Mary learns something about the  color red, namely,  what seeing red is like. What Mary learns consists of new, factual  information. So  there are facts about color in addition to all the physical facts about color (since Mary already knew all the  physical facts about color). Thus, the argument goes, physicalism  is false.
In the quarter century since Jackson’s development of the  knowledge argument, a vast literature has developed in response to it. Attempting to save physicalism, some  philosophers deny that Mary learns anything at all when she leaves the room. If we really imagine that Mary has learned all the physical facts about color while  in the room, then there would be no “Aha!” moment when she is shown a ripe  tomato. We are led to think otherwise  only because we typically fall short of imagining what we’ve been asked to  imagine—we imagine only that Mary knows an immense amount about colors, that  she has mastered all the information contained in our present science of color,  which still remains incomplete. As  Patricia Churchland has argued, “How can I assess what Mary will know and  understand if she knows everything there is to know about the brain?  Everything is a lot, and it means, in all likelihood, that Mary has a  radically different and deeper understanding of the brain than anything barely  conceivable in our wildest flights of fancy.”  (P.S. Churchland 1986, 332; see also Dennett 1991, 399-400)
Despite these reservations about what happens when Mary  leaves the room, most philosophers—even most physicalists—accept Jackson’s  assessment that Mary learns something from her experience with the ripe  tomato. Physicalists who grant this  point have typically attempted two different strategies to respond to the  knowledge argument: (1) They might accept that Mary gains new knowledge that  isn’t understood in terms of facts; or (2) they  might accept that Mary’s knowledge is factual but deny that she’s learned  anything new; rather, facts that she already knew are presented to her in a new  way.
To pursue strategy (1), the physicalist might argue that the  knowledge Mary gains when she leaves the room consists in nonfactual  knowledge. Along these lines, David  Lewis (1988) offers the ability hypothesis: When Mary leaves the room, all that happens is  that she gains some new abilities regarding color that she didn’t have  before. Unlike before, Mary is now able  to imagine, recognize, and remember the color red. So she gains know-how, but she doesn’t learn  any facts. Pursuing strategy (1) in a  different way, Earl Conee (1994) offers the acquaintance hypothesis: When Mary  leaves the room, all that happens is that she becomes acquainted with the color  red. When you meet someone for the first  time that you’ve previously heard or read a lot about, you don’t necessarily  learn any facts about them; rather, you just become acquainted with them. Conee thus argues that acquaintance knowledge  (like ability knowledge) should not be understood in terms of facts. If either the ability hypothesis or the  acquaintance hypothesis is right, and Mary does not learn any facts when she  leaves the room, then the knowledge argument does not show that the physical  facts are incomplete.
To pursue strategy (2), the physicalist might argue that  Mary doesn’t gain any new knowledge when she leaves the room; rather, she  simply comes to apprehend an old fact under a new guise. While in the room, she did not have the  conceptual apparatus she needed in order to apprehend certain color facts in a  phenomenal way. Having seen color, she  has now gained new concepts—phenomenal concepts—and thus is able to  re-apprehend the same facts she already knew in a different way. (Loar 1990)  Whether there are genuinely phenomenal concepts, and if so, whether they  do the work in answering the knowledge argument that the physicalists want them  to, has recently been generating a growing literature of its own.
 4. Qualia and Representationalism
While functionalism and physicalism are put forth as general  theories of mind, representationalism aims specifically to give an account of  qualia. According to this view, the  qualitative character of our phenomenal mental states depends on the  intentional content of such states.  Representationalist views divide into two categories depending on  exactly how they characterize this dependence. Weak representationalism makes  a claim only about  supervenience:  The qualitative character of our mental states supervenes on the intentional  content of those states (that is, if two  experiences are alike representationally, then they are alike phenomenally). Strong (or pure) representationalism makes a further claim: The qualitative character of our mental states consists  in the intentional content of such states.  Strong representationalism thus offers a theory of qualia—it attempts to  explain what qualitative character is.  This section addresses the strong representationalist theory of qualia;  hereafter, the modifier “strong” will be omitted.
Recall the distinction above between the easy problems of  consciousness and the hard problem.  Accounting for representational content is supposed to be one of the  easy problems. It may take us an  enormous amount of empirical work to get to the solution, but the standard  methods of cognitive science will be able to apply. Thus, if qualia can be reduced to  intentionality, then we have turned the hard problem of consciousness into an  easy problem. A full and satisfactory  account of qualia awaits only a solution to the easy problem of intentionality.
Consider pain qualia.  Traditionally, philosophers classified pain experiences as  non-intentional. However, the  representationalist claims that this is a mistake. When one has a pain in one’s leg, the  experience represents damage in the leg.  Moreover, its phenomenal feel—its painfulness—consists in its doing so. As Michael Tye argues, “[T]he phenomenal  character of my pain intuitively is something that is given to me via  introspection of what I experience in  having the pain. But what I experience  is what my experience represents. So,  phenomenal character is representational.” (Tye 1990, 338)
Given that the representationalist typically does not want  to claim that all intentional content is qualitative, he must explain what is  special about the intentional content in which phenomenal character is supposed  to consist. My belief that Thomas the  Tank Engine is blue and my mental image of Thomas the Tank Engine have similar  intentional content; they both represent him as blue. So, what about the intentional content of the  latter gives it its distinctive phenomenology?  Here Tye has a particularly well-developed answer. He suggests that phenomenal content is a  species of nonconceptual intentional content, in particular, nonconceptual  intentional content that is poised and abstract.  (Tye 1995) Because we can experience  many things for which we lack concepts—for example, a proud parent might visually  experience his young child’s drawing without having a concept for the shape  that the drawing is—it is important that phenomenal content be restricted to  nonconceptual content. The requirement  that the contents be poised means that they “stand ready and in position to  make a direct impact on the belief/desire system.” (Tye 1995, 138) The requirement that the contents be abstract  means that no particular concrete object is a part of them.
In support of their theory, representationalists often invoke  what we might call the transparency  thesis. According to this thesis,  experience is alleged to be transparent in the sense that we “see” right through it  to the object of that experience, analogously to the way that we see through a  pane of glass to whatever is on the other side of it. Gilbert Harman introduced such considerations  into the contemporary debate about qualia in a now-famous passage: “When Eloise  sees a tree before her, the colors she experiences are all experienced as  features of the tree and its surroundings.  None of them are experienced as intrinsic features of her  experience. Nor does she experience any  features of anything as intrinsic features of her experiences.” (Harman 1990, 667) As Harman went on to argue, the same is true  for all of us: When we look at a tree  and then introspect our visual experience, all we can find to attend to are  features of the presented tree. Our  experience is thus transparent; when we attend to it, we can do so only by  attending to what the experience represents.  Representationalists contend that their theory offers the best and  simplest possible explanation of this phenomenon. The best explanation of the fact that we  cannot introspectively find any intrinsic features of our experience is that  there are none to find; the phenomenal character of experience is wholly  constituted by the representational content of the experience. (see especially Tye 1995, 2000)
Whether experience is really transparent in the way that the  representationalists suppose has lately been the subject of some dispute, and  there has also been considerable discussion about the relationship between  experiential transparency and representationalism (See, for example, Kind 2003, Siewert 2004). Most problematic for the representationalists,  however, has been the fact that their view falls victim to several persistent  and compelling counterexamples. Many  phenomenal states simply do not seem to be doing any representing—or, more cautiously, it seems that their  phenomenal content far outruns their representational content. Ned Block has argued this point using the  example of the orgasm: “Orgasm is phenomenally impressive and there is nothing  very impressive about the representational content that there is an orgasm.” (Block  2003, 543) He also discusses phosphene  experiences, the color sensations created by pressure on the eyeball when one’s  eyelids are closed. Phosphene  experiences do not seem to be representing anything; we don’t take the  experience to suggest that there are colored moving expanses out there somewhere.
Consider also the experience of seeing something flying  overhead and hearing something flying overhead.  While these two experiences have quite different phenomenal characters,  their representational contents are plausibly the same: there’s something flying overhead. (The most obvious way of differentiating them—by talking of the “way” of  representing—brings in something nonrepresentational.) If this is right, then phenomenal character  does not supervene on representational character. In response to objections of this sort, intramodal representationalists restrict  their view so that it applies only within a given sensory modality. Unlike intermodal  representationalists, who claim that all phenomenal differences, even differences between sensory modalities, can be  explained in terms of representational content, intramodal representationalists  think that we must offer some additional explanation to account for what makes  a phenomenal experience auditory rather than visual, or visual rather than  tactile. Typically, this additional  explanation is provided in functionalist terms.  (See Lycan 1996, esp. 134-35)
Along with these sorts of counterexamples,  representationalism also falls victim to a version of the inverted qualia  argument: the case of Inverted Earth (Block 1990). On Inverted Earth, the colors of objects are  inverted relative to earth. Ripe  tomatoes are green; unripe tomatoes are red.  Big Bird is blue; the Cookie Monster is yellow. Other than this color inversion, everything  else on Inverted Earth is exactly like earth.  Now imagine that, without your knowledge, you are fitted with  color-inverting lenses and transported to Inverted Earth. Since the lens-inversion cancels out the  inversion of colors of Inverted Earth, you are unable to detect that you’re in  a different environment. When you look  at the sky on Inverted Earth, you have a blue experience even though the sky  there is yellow; when you look at the green ripe tomatoes, you have a red  experience. While originally on earth,  your red experience while looking at ripe tomatoes represented red. But according to Block, after enough time  passes and you have become embedded in the linguistic and physical environment of  Inverted Earth, your reddish experience while looking at ripe tomatoes  represents green (since that is the color of the ripe tomatoes on Inverted  Earth). If Block’s description of the  Inverted Earth case is correct, then two experiences having identical  qualitative character can differ in their intentional contents; thus, qualia do  not supervene on intentional content and representationalism must be false.
In response to the Inverted Earth scenario,  representationalists often adopt a teleological  account of intentionality according to which the intentional contents of an  individual’s qualitative states are determined by the evolutionary history of  its species. This allows them to reject  Block’s assertion that your intentional contents switch to match the Inverted  Earthlings intentional contents. Humans  have evolved such that red experiences represent red things. Thus, no matter how long you spend on  Inverted Earth, the intentional contents of your reddish experiences will never  switch to match the intentional contents of the Inverted Earthlings.
A completely different source of worry about  representationalism has been raised by John Searle. Searle agrees with the representationalist  that there is a close connection between phenomenal consciousness and intentionality,  but he thinks that the representationalist gets the explanatory connection  backwards. Rather than explain  consciousness in terms of intentionality, Searle claims that we need to explain  intentionality in terms of consciousness: “There is a conceptual connection  between consciousness and intentionality that has the consequence that a  complete theory of intentionality requires an account of consciousness.”  (Searle 1992, 132) Recent work by George  Graham, Terry Horgan, and John Tienson argues along similar lines. On their view, “the most fundamental,  nonderivative sort of intentionality is fully constituted by  phenomenology.” (Graham and Horgan 2008,  92; see also Horgan and Tienson 2002)
 5. Eliminativism about Qualia
Rather than trying to find some way to fit qualia into a physicalist  theory of mind, some philosophers have taken an entirely different attitude  towards qualia.  They deny that qualia exist. This  position is known as eliminativism about qualia, and it commonly constitutes a part of a larger eliminativist  project about mental states in general.  For example, Paul and Patricia Churchland have argued (both together and  individually) that as we gain more and more neuroscientific understanding of  our mental lives, we will come to see that our current mental state concepts—belief,  pain, sensation, qualia, etc.—all need to be discarded.
The Churchlands offer numerous useful analogies to help make  this point. To consider just one of  their examples: Ptolemaic theory placed  the Earth at the center of the universe, around which a giant celestial sphere  revolved. This created all sorts of  difficult problems in need of solutions, like determining the cause of the  sphere’s rotation. When Newtonian  theory displaced Ptolemaic theory, the notion of the celestial sphere was completely  discarded. It wasn’t that Ptolemaic  theorists had an inadequate account of the celestial sphere; rather, what was  discovered was that there was no  celestial sphere. Thus, the problem  of what causes the sphere’s movement turned out to be a pseudo-problem. Similarly, the Churchlands predict that as  our neuroscientific knowledge increases, we will come to see that the problem  of qualia is a pseudo-problem, because we will come to see that there are no qualia—at least not as  presently understood. Just as the  celestial sphere did not turn out to be identifiable with or reducible to some  element of Newtonian theory, qualia will not turn out to be identifiable with  or reducible to some element of future neuroscientific theory. Rather, the concept will have to be  eliminated entirely. (P.S. Churchland  1986, 292-293; P.M. Churchland 1984, 43-45)
Insofar as eliminative materialism merely makes a  prediction about what will happen once we increase our neuroscientific  knowledge, it is hard to evaluate. However,  Daniel Dennett offers related arguments for eliminativism designed to show  there is such internal inconsistency in our notion of qualia that we are  hopelessly misguided in trying to retain it.  According to Dennett, there are no properties that meet the standard  conception of qualia (that is, properties of  experience that are intrinsic, ineffable, directly and/or immediately  introspectible, and private). He reaches this conclusion by consideration  of numerous thought experiments that are designed to tease out the alleged  confusions inherent in our concept of qualia.  For example, consider two coffee drinkers, Chase and Sanborn. Both discover one day that they no longer  like the Maxwell House coffee they’ve long enjoyed. Chase claims: “Even though the coffee still  tastes the same to me, I now no longer like that taste.” In contrast, Sanborn  claims: “The coffee now tastes different to me, and I don’t like the new  taste.” But, asks Dennett, how do they  know this? Perhaps Chase’s taste  receptors have changed so gradually that he hasn’t noticed a change in taste; that is, perhaps he’s really in the situation that  Sanborn purports to be in. Or perhaps  Sanborn’s standards have changed so gradually that he hasn’t noticed that he  now employs different criteria in evaluating the coffee;  that is, perhaps he’s really in the situation that Chase purports to be  in. There seems no first-personal way  for Chase and Sanborn to settle the matter, calling into question the idea that  they have any kind of direct or special access to private properties of their  experience. We might try to devise some  behavioral tests to detect the difference, but if we could do so, that would  suggest that qualia could be defined relationally, in reference to behavior,  and this would call into question the idea that they are intrinsic. Thus, concludes Dennett, our conception of  qualia is so confused that it would be “tactically obtuse” to try to salvage  the notion; rather, we should just admit that “there simply are no qualia at  all.” (Dennett 1988)
 6. Naturalistic Dualism
There is at least one further option available to  philosophers when confronting the hard problem of consciousness. Without denying the reality of qualia, one  might simply accept that they resist reduction in physical, functional, or  representational terms and embrace some form of dualism. This is David Chalmers’ own approach to the  hard problem. Because he believes that  we can account for phenomenal consciousness within a solely  natural framework, he adopts what he refers to as naturalistic dualism.
Descartes’ dualism was a version of substance dualism. According  to Descartes, the mind is an immaterial substance existing independently of the  body. In contrast, Chalmers’ dualism is  a version of property dualism. This  view does not posit the existence of any nonphysical or immaterial substances,  but instead posits the existence of properties—qualia—that are ontologically  independent of any physical properties.  Though these properties are not entailed by physicalism (that is, though they do not logically supervene on  physical properties) they may nonetheless  somehow arise from them. As Chalmers  describes his view: “[C]onsciousness arises from a physical substrate in virtue  of certain contingent laws of nature, which are not themselves implied by  physical laws.” (Chalmers 1996, 125)
Physics postulates a number of fundamental features of the  world: mass, spin, charge, etc.  Naturalistic dualism adds nonphysical phenomenal properties to this  list. Correspondingly, it suggests we  must add fundamental laws governing the behavior of the fundamental phenomenal  features to the list of the fundamental laws governing the behavior of the  fundamental physical features of the world.  We don’t presently understand exactly what these new laws and the  completed theory containing them will look like, and Chalmers admits that  developing such a theory will not be easy, but in principle it should be  possible to do so.
This commitment to lawfulness is what allows Chalmers to  remain within a naturalistic framework, even as he abandons the physicalistic  framework. On his view, “the world still  consists in a network of fundamental properties related by basic laws, and  everything is to be ultimately explained in those terms. All that has happened is that the inventory  of properties and laws has been expanded [beyond the physical properties and  laws].” (Chalmers 1996, 127-8) In a similar spirit, Gregg Rosenberg has  recently offered a view he calls liberal naturalism.Though liberal naturalism holds that  the fundamental properties of the world “are mutually related in a coherent and  natural way by a single set of fundamental laws,” it denies that these  properties and laws can all be completely captured in physical terms. (Rosenberg 2004, 9)
In giving up physicalism, naturalists argue that we can  retain almost everything that’s important about our current scientific  worldview. But the adoption of  nonphysicalistic naturalism typically leads in two directions that many have  thought problematic. First, it seems to  imply panpsychism, the view that everything in the universe has consciousness. Once you accept the existence of nonphysical  features of the world that are fundamental, it is hard to find a principled way  of limiting exactly where those fundamental features are found. As Chalmers admits, “if experience is truly a  fundamental property, it seems natural for it to be widespread.” (Chalmers  1996, 297; see also Nagel 1979) Second,  it seems to commit one to epiphenomenalism, the view that qualia lack any  causal power whatsoever. Intuitively, we  believe that the qualitative character of pain—the fact that it hurts—causes us  to react the way that we do when we feel pain.  But if qualia are epiphenomenal, then the painfulness of pain is  causally inert.
In addressing the first of these two worries, Chalmers  denies that naturalistic dualism entails panpyschism. Though he recognizes that it provides a  particularly elegant way of working out the details of the view that experience  supervenes naturally on the physical, he believes that there remains the  possibility that those details could be worked out another way. Benjamin Libet, for example, offers a theory that  sees consciousness as fundamental without endorsing panpsychism (Libet  1996). In contrast to Chalmers and  Libet, Rosenberg concedes that nonreductive naturalism will most likely require  us to adopt at least a weak form of panpsychism, and he offers arguments to  show why this consequence should not be seen as threatening.
Even if naturalism leads only to a mild form of panpyschism,  however, most contemporary philosophers would find this extremely  problematic. How could blades of grass,  or rocks, or atoms be conscious?  Panpsychism is almost universally regarded with skepticism, if not  outright scorn. Colin McGinn, for  example, has claimed that panpsychism is “metaphysically and scientifically  outrageous.” (McGinn 1996, 34) Similarly, in reaction to Chalmers’  panpsychist musings, John Searle calls panpsychism “absurd” and claims that  there is “not the slightest reason” to adopt it. (Searle 1997, 161)
The worries about epiphenomenalism are no less troublesome  for the naturalist than are the worries about panpsychism. Intuitively speaking, qualia are important  aspects of our mental lives. The  itchiness of an itch makes us scratch, the delicious taste of chocolate leads  us to reach for another piece, the wrenching feeling of grief erupts in a flood  of tears. But if qualia are physically  irreducible, then it seems they must be left out of the causal explanations of  our actions. We typically assume that  the physical world is causally closed; all physical events, including bodily  movements, can be given complete causal explanations in wholly physical  terms. Unless we reject causal closure,  then assuming we do not want to embrace the possibility of causal  overdetermination, qualia have no role to play in the causal story of our  actions.
We can easily see why naturalism leads to epiphenomenalism  by reconsidering the zombie world. By  hypothesis, your zombie twin is behaviorally indistinguishable from you despite  having no qualia. His actions can be  causally explained entirely by the physical workings of his brain. But he’s a molecule-for-molecule duplicate of  you, so the physical workings of your brain can provide a complete causal  explanation of your actions. Your qualia  play no role in causing the actions that you perform.
Chalmers addresses the threat of epiphenomenalism in two  ways. First, he suggests that our  inadequate understanding of the nature of causation may here be leading us  astray: “it is possible that when causation is better understood we will be in  a position to understand a subtle way in which consciousness may be relevant.” (Chalmers 1996, 150) Second, he tries to show that  epiphenomenalism may not be as unpalatable as many have thought. In particular, he argues that we don’t have  any reasons to reject epiphenomenalism except for its seeming  counterintuitive; there are no effective arguments against it. (See also Jackson 1982.) Moreover, given the fatal flaws that threaten  the competing alternatives to naturalistic dualism, it may turn out that accepting  some degree of counterintuitiveness is the small price we have to pay in order  to develop a coherent and unmysterious view of consciousness and its place in  nature.
7. References and Further Reading

Block, N. 2007. Consciousness, Function, and Representation. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

A very useful collection bringing  together Block’s impressive body of work in philosophy of mind on issues  relating to functionalism, qualia, and consciousness.


Block, N. 2003.  “Mental Paint.” In Martin Hahn  and Bjorn Ramberg, eds., Reflections and  Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge, 165-200. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 2003. Reprinted in Block 2007, 533-563; page  references are to the reprinted version.

A helpful characterization of the  issues surrounding representationalism (which Block calls representationism) and a defense of a qualia realist view he calls phenomenism.


Block, N. 1994.  “Qualia.” In Samuel Guttenplan,  ed., A Companion to the Philosophy of  Mind, 514-520. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. Reprinted in Block 2007, 501-510.
Block, N. 1990.  “Inverted Earth.” In James  Tomberlin, ed., Philosophical  Perspectives 4, Action Theory and  Philosophy of Mind, 53-79.  Atascadero, Calif.:  Ridgeview. Reprinted in Block  2007, 511-532.

A reply to Harman’s “The Intrinsic  Quality of Experience.” This paper  introduces the much-discussed Inverted Earth thought experiment, a version of  the inverted qualia argument targeting representationalism.


Block, N. 1978.  “Troubles with Functionalism.” In  C.W. Savage, ed., Perception and  Cognition: Issues in the Foundations of Psychology, pp. 261-326. Reprinted with revision and abridgement in  Block 2007, 63-101.

An influential work that develops  in detail the absent qualia objection to functionalism.


Block, N., Flanagan, O., and Guzeldere, G.,  eds. 1997. The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

An anthology collecting much of the  classic work on consciousness.


Byrne, A. 2001.  “Intentionalism Defended.” Philosophical Review 110: 199-240.

A very useful overview of the  issues surrounding representationalism.


Chalmers, D. 1996. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a  Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

One of the most important books in  philosophy of mind over the last twenty years; introduces and discusses in detail  the hard problem of consciousness.  Although the book is technical in parts, the most technical sections are  indicated by asterisk and can be skipped without losing the overall argument.


Chalmers, D. 1995.  “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness.” Journal  of Consciousness Studies 2: 200-219.
Churchland, P.M. 1984. Matter and Consciousness: A Contemporary Introduction to the Philosophy  of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

An accessible introductory  text to the philosophy of mind, though Churchland’s own eliminativist leanings  shade his treatment of the issues discussed.


Churchland, P.S. 1986. Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of  the Mind-Brain. Cambridge, Mass.:  The MIT Press.
Churchland, P.M. and  Churchland, P.S. 1981. “Functionalism, Qualia, and  Intentionality.” Philosophical Topics 12: 121-145.
Conee, E. 1994.  “Phenomenal Knowledge.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72:  136-150. Reprinted in Ludlow et al,  2004.

A classic presentation of  Conee’s “acquaintance hypothesis” in response to Jackson’s knowledge argument.


Dennett, D. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Boston:  Little, Brown and Company.
Dennett, D. 1988.  “Quining Qualia.” In A. Marcel  and E. Bisiach, eds., Consciousness in  Contemporary Science, 43-77. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Argues, in Dennett’s  characteristically jocular style, for eliminativism about qualia.


Dretske, F. 1995. Naturalizing  the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT  Press.

A sustained argument for  representationalism, with sustained discussion of how representation works.


Graham, G. and  Horgan, T. “Qualia Realism’s Contents  and Discontents.” In Edmond Wright,  ed., The  Case for Qualia. Cambridge, Mass.:  The MIT Press (2008), 89-107.
Harman, G. 1990.  “The Intrinsic Quality of Experience.”  In James Tomberlin, ed., Philosophical  Perspectives 4, Action Theory and  Philosophy of Mind, 31-52.  Atascadero, Calif.:  Ridgeview. Reprinted in Block et  al, 1997, 663-675; page references to the reprinted version.

Introduces considerations of the  transparency of experience into contemporary discussions of qualia.


Haugeland, J.  1978. “The Nature and Plausibility of  Cognitivism.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2: 215-260.
Hill, C. and  McLaughlin, B. 1999. “There are Fewer Things in Reality than are  Dreamt of in Chalmers’ Philosophy.” Journal of Phenomenological Research 59:  445-454.
Horgan, T. and  Tienson, J. 2002. “The Intentionality of Phenomenology and the  Phenomenology of Intentionality.” In  David Chalmers, ed., Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford University Press (2002),  520-533.
Jackson, F. 1982.  “Epiphenomenal Qualia.” Philosophical Quarterly 32:  127-136. Reprinted in Ludlow et al,  2004.

Jackson’s classic paper first  laying out the Mary case and the knowledge argument against physicalism.


Keeley, B. 2009.  “The Early History of the Quale and Its Relation to the Senses.” In John  Symons and Paco Calvo, eds., Routledge Companion to the Philosophy of  Psychology. New York: Routledge Press.

Reviews the history of the use of  the term “qualia,” both before and after C.I. Lewis introduced it into the  philosophical literature in roughly its contemporary sense.


Kind, A. 2003.  “What’s So Transparent About Transparency?” Philosophical  Studies 115: 225-244.
Levine, J. 1983.  “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap.” Pacific  Philosophical Quarterly 64: 354-361.
Lewis, C.I. 1929. Mind  and the World Order. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Introduces the term “qualia” in its  contemporary sense (introspectible, monadic, subjective properties), though  Lewis uses it in the context of sense data.


Lewis, D. 1988.  “What Experience Teaches.” In J.  Copley-Coltheart, ed., Proceedings of the  Russellian Society 13: 29-57.  Reprinted in Ludlow et al, 2004.

An influential presentation  of the “ability hypothesis” in response to Jackson’s knowledge argument.


Libet, B. 1996.  “Solutions to the Hard Problem of Consciousness.” Journal  of Consciousness Studies 3: 33-35.
Loar, B. 1990.  “Phenomenal States.” In James  Tomberlin, ed., Philosophical  Perspectives 4, Action Theory and  Philosophy of Mind, 81-108.  Atascadero, Calif.:  Ridgeview. Revised version  reprinted in Ludlow et al, 2004.
Ludlow, P.,  Nagasawa, Y., and Stoljar, D. 2004. There’s  Something About Mary: Essays on  Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson’s Knowledge Argument. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

An anthology that  collects Jackson’s original two papers laying out the knowledge argument along  with many important papers in response.  Also contains Jackson’s recent surprising recantation of the original  argument, published here for the first time.  Jackson now believes that the representationalist view helps us to see  how the argument goes wrong.


Lycan, W.G. 1996. Consciousness  and Experience. Cambridge,  Mass.: The MIT Press.

A development of Lycan’s intramodal  representationalism.


Lycan, W. 1995. Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
McGinn, C. 1989.  “Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?” Mind 98: 349-366.  Reprinted in Block et al, 1997, 529-542.

Defends new mysterianism, that is, the view  that the problem of consciousness cannot in principle be solved.


McGinn, C. 1996. The  Character of Mind (Second Edition).  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, T. 1998.  “Conceiving the Impossible and the Mind-Body Problem”, Philosophy 73: 337-352
Nagel, T. 1979. “Panpsychism.” In Mortal Questions. Cambridge  University Press.
Nagel, T. 1974.  “What is it Like to be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 83: 435-450. Reprinted in Block et al, 1997, 519-527; page  references are to the reprinted version.

A classic paper arguing that  physicalism cannot accommodate the subjective aspects of experience—much-cited  and well worth reading.


Rosenberg,  G. 2004. A Place for Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Searle, John.  1997. The Mystery of Consciousness.  New York: New York Review of Books.

A collection of Searle’s essays  from The New York Review of Books.


Searle, J. 1992. The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

Argues for a conceptual connection  between consciousness and intentionality.


Shoemaker,  S. 1975.  “Functionalism and Qualia.” Philosophical Studies 27, 291-315.

An interesting argument attempting  to show that functionalism can handle inverted qualia. Shoemaker’s own view about qualia is somewhat  idiosyncratic in that he denies they are directly introspectible.


Siewert, C. 2004. “Is  Experience Transparent?” Philosophical Studies, 117: 15-41.
Tye, M. 2000. Consciousness,  Color, and Content. Cambridge,  Mass.: The MIT Press.

Further development of the  representationalist view, including responses to common criticisms of the view.


Tye, M. 1995. Ten  Problems of Consciousness.  Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

Develops a strong  representationalist view in an attempt to unravel several puzzling aspects of  consciousness (its subjectivity, transparency, etc.).


Tye, M. 1990.  “A Representational Theory of Pains and their Phenomenal  Character.” In James Tomberlin, ed., Philosophical Perspectives 9. Atascadero, Calif.: Ridgeview.

An early statement of  representationalism, here limited specifically to pain.



Author Information
Amy Kind
Email: amy.kind@cmc.edu
Claremont McKenna College
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







