








Neo-Platonism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Neo-Platonism
Neo-platonism (or Neoplatonism) is a modern term used to designate the period of Platonic  philosophy beginning with the work of Plotinus and ending with the closing of the Platonic Academy by the Emperor Justinian  in 529 C.E. This brand of Platonism, which is often described as ‘mystical’  or religious in nature, developed outside the mainstream of Academic Platonism.  The origins of Neoplatonism can be traced back to the era of Hellenistic  syncretism which spawned such movements and schools of thought as Gnosticism and the Hermetic tradition. A major factor in this syncretism, and one  which had an immense influence on the development of Platonic thought,  was the introduction of the Jewish Scriptures into Greek intellectual circles  via the translation known as the Septuagint. The encounter between  the creation narrative of Genesis and the cosmology of Plato’s Timaeus set in motion a long tradition of cosmological theorizing that finally  culminated in the grand schema of Plotinus’ Enneads. Plotinus’ two  major successors, Porphyry and Iamblichus, each developed, in their own  way, certain isolated aspects of Plotinus’ thought, but neither of them  developed a rigorous philosophy to match that of their master. It was Proclus  who, shortly before the closing of the Academy, bequeathed a systematic  Platonic philosophy upon the world that in certain ways approached the  sophistication of Plotinus. Finally, in the work of the so-called Pseudo-Dionysius,  we find a grand synthesis of Platonic philosophy and Christian theology  that was to exercise an immense influence on mediaeval mysticism and Renaissance Humanism.
Table of Contents

 What is Neoplatonism? 
 Plotinian Neoplatonism 

 Contemplation and Creation 
 Nature and Personality 
 Salvation and the Cosmic Process 

 Plotinus’ Last Words 


 The Achievement of Plotinus 

 The Plotinian Synthesis 




 Porphyry and Iamblichus 

 The Nature of the Soul 

 The (re)turn to Astrology 


 The Quest for Transcendence 

 Theurgy and the Distrust of Dialectic 




 Proclus and Pseudo-Dionysius 

 Being — Becoming — Being 
 The God Beyond Being 


 Appendix: The Renaissance Platonists 
References and Further Reading


 1. What is Neoplatonism?
The term ‘Neoplatonism’ is a modern construction. Plotinus,  who is often considered the ‘founder’ of Neoplatonism, would not have  considered himself a “new” Platonist in any sense, but simply an expositor  of the doctrines of Plato. That this required him to formulate an entirely  new philosophical system would not have been viewed by him as a problem,  for it was, in his eyes, precisely what the Platonic doctrine required.  In a sense, this is true, for as early as the Old Academy we find Plato’s  successors struggling with the proper interpretation of his thought, and  arriving at strikingly different conclusions. Also, in the Hellenistic  era, certain Platonic ideas were taken up by thinkers of various loyalties  — Jewish, Gnostic, Christian — and worked up into new forms of expression  that varied quite considerably from what Plato actually wrote in his Dialogues.  Should this lead us to the conclusion that these thinkers were any less  ‘loyal’ to Plato than were the members of the Academy (in its various forms  throughout the centuries preceding Plotinus)? No; for the multiple and  often contradictory uses made of Platonic ideas is a testament to the universality  of Plato’s thought — that is, its ability to admit of a wide variety of  interpretations and applications. In this sense, Neo-Platonism may  be said to have begun immediately after Plato’s death, when new approaches  to his philosophy were being broached. Indeed, we already see a hint, in  the doctrines of Xenocrates (the second head of the Old Academy) of a type  of salvation theory involving the unification of the two parts of the human  soul — the “Olympian” or heavenly, and the “Titanic” or earthly (Dillon  1977, p. 27). If we accept Frederick Copleston’s description of Neoplatonism  as “the intellectualist reply to the … yearning for personal salvation”  (Copleston 1962, p. 216) we can already locate the beginning of this reply  as far back as the Old Academy, and Neoplatonism would then not have begun  with Plotinus. However, it is not clear that Xenocrates’ idea of salvation  involved the individual; it is quite possible that he was referring to  a unified human nature in an abstract sense. In any case, the early Hermetic-Gnostic  tradition is certainly to an extent Platonic, and later Gnosticism and Christian Logos theology markedly so. If an intellectual reply  to a general yearning for personal salvation is what characterizes Neoplatonism,  then the highly intellectual Gnostics and Christians of the Late Hellenistic  era must be given the title of Neoplatonists. However, if we are to be  rigorous and define Neoplatonism as the synthesis of various more or less  ‘Platonistic’ ideas into a grand expression of Platonic philosophy, then  Plotinus must be considered the founder of Neoplatonism. Yet we must not  forget that these Platonizing Christian, Gnostic, Jewish, and other ‘pagan’  thinkers provided the necessary speculative material to make this synthesis  possible.
 2. Plotinian Neoplatonism
The great third century thinker and ‘founder’ of Neoplatonism,  Plotinus,  is responsible for the grand synthesis of progressive Christian and Gnostic ideas with the traditional Platonic philosophy. He answered the challenge  of accounting for the emergence of a seemingly inferior and flawed cosmos  from the perfect mind of the divinity by declaring outright that all objective  existence is but the external self-expression of an inherently contemplative  deity known as the One (to hen), or the Good (ta kalon).  Plotinus compares the expression of the superior godhead with the self-expression  of the individual soul, which proceeds from the perfect conception of a  Form (eidos), to the always flawed expression of this Form in the  manner of a materially derived ‘personality’ that risks succumbing to the  demands of divisive discursivity, and so becomes something less than divine.  This diminution of the divine essence in temporality is but a necessary  moment of the complete expression of the One. By elevating the experience  of the individual soul to the status of an actualization of a divine Form,  Plotinus succeeded, also, in preserving, if not the autonomy, at least  the dignity and ontological necessity of personality. The Cosmos,  according to Plotinus, is not a created order, planned by a deity on whom  we can pass the charge of begetting evil; for the Cosmos is the self-expression  of the Soul, which corresponds, roughly, to Philo’s logos  prophorikos, the logos endiathetos of which is the Intelligence  (nous). Rather, the Cosmos, in Plotinian terms, is to be understood  as the concrete result or ‘product’ of the Soul’s experience of its own  Mind (nous). Ideally, this concrete expression should serve the  Soul as a reference-point for its own self-conscious existence; however,  the Soul all too easily falls into the error of valuing the expression  over the principle (arkhê), which is the contemplation of  the divine Forms. This error gives rise to evil, which is the purely subjective  relation of the Soul (now divided) to the manifold and concrete forms of  its expressive act. When the Soul, in the form of individual existents,  becomes thus preoccupied with its experience, Nature comes into being,  and the Cosmos takes on concrete form as the locus of personality.
 a. Contemplation and Creation
Hearkening back, whether consciously or not, to the doctrine of Speusippus  (Plato’s successor in the Academy) that the One is utterly transcendent  and “beyond being,” and that the Dyad is the true first principle (Dillon  1977, p. 12), Plotinus declares that the One is “alone with itself” and  ineffable (cf. Enneads VI.9.6 and V.2.1). The One does not act to  produce a cosmos or a spiritual order, but simply generates from itself,  effortlessly, a power (dunamis) which is at once the Intellect (nous)  and the object of contemplation (theôria) of this Intellect.  While Plotinus suggests that the One subsists by thinking itself as itself,  the Intellect subsists through thinking itself as other, and therefore  becomes divided within itself: this act of division within the Intellect  is the production of Being, which is the very principle of expression or  discursivity (Ennead V.1.7). For this reason, the Intellect stands  as Plotinus’ sole First Principle. At this point, the thinking or contemplation  of the Intellect is divided up and ordered into thoughts, each of them  subsisting in and for themselves, as autonomous reflections of the dunamis of the One. These are the Forms (eidê), and out of their inert  unity there arises the Soul, whose task it is to think these Forms discursively  and creatively, and to thereby produce or create a concrete, living expression  of the divine Intellect. This activity of the Soul results in the production  of numerous individual souls: living actualizations of the possibilities  inherent in the Forms. Whereas the Intellect became divided within itself  through contemplation, the Soul becomes divided outside of itself, through  action (which is still contemplation, according to Plotinus, albeit the  lowest type; cf. Ennead III.8.4), and this division constitutes  the Cosmos, which is the expressive or creative act of the Soul, also referred  to as Nature. When the individual soul reflects upon Nature as its own  act, this soul is capable of attaining insight (gnôsis) into  the essence of Intellect; however, when the soul views nature as something  objective and external — that is, as something to be experienced or undergone,  while forgetting that the soul itself is the creator of this Nature —  evil and suffering ensue. Let us now examine the manner in which Plotinus  explains Nature as the locus of personality.
 b. Nature and Personality
Contemplation, at the level of the Soul, is for Plotinus a two-way street.  The Soul both contemplates, passively, the Intellect, and reflects upon  its own contemplative act by producing Nature and the Cosmos. The individual  souls that become immersed in Nature, as moments of the Soul’s eternal  act, will, ideally, gain a complete knowledge of the Soul in its unity,  and even of the Intellect, by reflecting upon the concrete results of the  Soul’s act — that is, upon the externalized, sensible entities that comprise  the physical Cosmos. This reflection, if carried by the individual soul  with a memory of its provenance always in the foreground, will lead to  a just governing of the physical Cosmos, which will make of it a perfect  material image of the Intellectual Cosmos, i.e., the realm of the Forms  (cf. Enneads IV.3.7 and IV.8.6). However, things don’t always turn  out so well, for individual souls often “go lower than is needful … in  order to light the lower regions, but it is not good for them to go so  far” (Ennead IV.3.17, tr. O’Brien 1964). For when the soul extends  itself ever farther into the indeterminacy of materiality, it gradually  loses memory of its divine origin, and comes to identify itself more and  more with its surroundings — that is to say: the soul identifies itself  with the results of the Soul’s act, and forgets that it is, as part  of this Soul, itself an agent of the act. This is tantamount to a relinquishing,  by the soul, of its divine nature. When the soul has thus abandoned itself,  it begins to accrue many alien encrustations, if you will, that make of  it something less than divine. These encrustations are the ‘accidents’  (in the Aristotelian sense) of personality. And yet the soul is never completely  lost, for, as Plotinus insists, the soul need simply “think upon essential  being” in order to return to itself, and continue to exist authentically  as a governor of the Cosmos (Ennead IV.8.4-6). The memory of the  personality that this wandering soul possessed must be forgotten in order  for it to return completely to its divine nature; for if it were remembered,  we would have to say, contradictorily, that the soul holds a memory of  what occurred during its state of forgetfulness! So in a sense, Plotinus  holds that individual personalities are not maintained at the level of  Soul. However, if we understand personality as more than just a particular  attitude attached to a concrete mode of existence, and rather view it as  the sum total of experiences reflected upon in intellect, then souls most  certainly retain their personalities, even at the highest level, for they  persist as thoughts within the divine Mind (cp. Ennead IV.8.5).  The personality that one acquires in action (the lowest type of contemplation)  is indeed forgotten and dissolved, but the ‘personality’ or persistence  in intellect that one achieves through virtuous acts most definitely  endures (Ennead IV.3.32).
 c. Salvation and the Cosmic Process
Plotinus, like his older contemporary, the Christian philosopher Origen of Alexandria, views the descent of the soul into the material realm as  a necessary moment in the unfolding of the divine Intellect, or God. For  this reason, the descent itself is not an evil, for it is a reflection  of God’s essence. Both Origen and Plotinus place the blame for experiencing  this descent as an evil squarely upon the individual soul. Of course, these  thinkers held, respectively, quite different views as to why and how the  soul experiences the descent as an evil; but they held one thing in common:  that the rational soul will naturally choose the Good, and that any failure  to do so is the result of forgetfulness or acquired ignorance. But whence  this failure? Origen gave what, to Plotinus’ mind, must have been a quite  unsatisfactory answer: that souls pre-existed as spiritual beings, and  when they desired to create or ‘beget’ independently of God, they all fell  into error, and languished there until the coming of Logos Incarnate. This  view has more than a little Gnostic flavor to it, which would have sat  ill with Plotinus, who was a great opponent of Gnosticism.  The fall of the soul Plotinus refers, quite simply, to the tension between  pure contemplation and divisive action — a tension that constitutes the  natural mode of existence of the soul (cf. Ennead IV.8.6-7). Plotinus  tells us that a thought is only completed or fully comprehended after it  has been expressed, for only then can the thought be said to have passed  from potentiality to actuality (Ennead IV.3.30). The question of  whether Plotinus places more value on the potential or the actual is really  of no consequence, for in the Plotinian plêrôma every  potentiality generates an activity, and every activity becomes itself a  potential for new activity (cf. Ennead III.8.8); and since the One,  which is the goal or object of desire of all existents, is neither potentiality  nor actuality, but “beyond being” (epekeina ousias), it is impossible  to say whether the striving of existents, in Plotinus’ schema, will result  in full and complete actualization, or in a repose of potentiality that  will make them like their source. “Likeness to God as far as possible,”  for Plotinus, is really likeness to oneself — authentic existence.  Plotinus leaves it up to the individual to determine what this means.
 i. Plotinus’ Last Words
In his biography of Plotinus, Porphyry records the last words of his  teacher to his students as follows: “Strive to bring back the god in yourselves  to the God in the All” (Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 2, my translation).  After uttering these words, Plotinus, one of the greatest philosophers  the world has ever known, passed away. The simplicity of this final statement  seems to be at odds with the intellectual rigors of Plotinus’ treatises,  which challenge — and more often than not vanquish — just about every  prominent philosophical view of the era. But this is only if we take this  remark in a mystical or ecstatic religious sense. Plotinus demanded the  utmost level of intellectual clarity in dealing with the problem of humankind’s  relation to the highest principle of existence. Striving for or desiring  salvation was not, for Plotinus, an excuse for simply abandoning oneself  to faith or prayer or unreflective religious rituals; rather, salvation  was to be achieved through the practice of philosophical investigation,  of dialectic. The fact that Plotinus, at the end of his life, had arrived  at this very simple formulation, serves to show that his dialectical quest  was successful. In his last treatise, “On the Primal Good” (Ennead I.7), Plotinus is able to assert, in the same breath, that both life and  death are good. He says this because life is the moment in which the soul  expresses itself and revels in the autonomy of the creative act. However,  this life, since it is characterized by action, eventually leads to exhaustion,  and the desire, not for autonomous action, but for reposeful contemplation  — of a fulfillment that is purely intellectual and eternal. Death is the  relief of this exhaustion, and the return to a state of contemplative repose.  Is this return to the Intellect a return to potentiality? It is hard to  say. Perhaps it is a synthesis of potentiality and actuality: the moment  at which the soul is both one and many, both human and divine. This would  constitute Plotinian salvation — the fulfillment of the exhortation of  the dying sage.
 d. The Achievement of Plotinus
In the last analysis, what stands as the most important and impressive  accomplishment of Plotinus is the manner in which he synthesized the pure,  ‘semi-mythical’ expression of Plato with the logical rigors of the Peripatetic  and Stoic schools, yet without losing sight of philosophy’s most important  task: of rendering the human experience in intelligible and analyzable  terms. That Plotinus’ thought had to take the ‘detour’ through such wildly  mystical and speculative paths as Gnosticism and Christian salvation theology is only proof of his clear-sightedness,  thoroughness, and admirable humanism. For all of his dialectical difficulties  and perambulations, Plotinus’ sole concern is with the well-being (eudaimonia)  of the human soul. This is, of course, to be understood as an intellectual,  as opposed to a merely physical or even emotional well-being, for Plotinus  was not concerned with the temporary or the temporal. The striving of the  human mind for a mode of existence more suited to its intuited potential  than the ephemeral possibilities of this material realm, while admittedly  a striving born of temporality, is nonetheless directed toward atemporal  and divine perfection. This is a striving or desire rendered all the more  poignant and worthy of philosophy precisely because it is born in the depths  of existential angst, and not in the primitive ecstasies of unreflective  ritual. As the last true representative of the Greek philosophical spirit,  Plotinus is Apollonian, not Dionysian. His concern is with the intellectual  beautification of the human soul, and for this reason his notion of salvation  does not, like Origen’s,  imply an eternal state of objective contemplation of the divinity — for  Plotinus, the separation between human and god breaks down, so that when  the perfected soul contemplates itself, it is also contemplating the Supreme.
 i. The Plotinian Synthesis
Plotinus was faced with the task of defending the true Platonic philosophy,  as he understood it, against the inroads being made, in his time, most  of all by Gnostics, but also by orthodox Christianity. Instead of launching  an all-out attack on these new ideas, Plotinus took what was best from  them, in his eyes, and brought these ideas into concert with his own brand  of Platonism. For this reason, we are sometimes surprised to see Plotinus,  in one treatise, speaking of the cosmos as a realm of forgetfulness and  error, while in another, speaking of the cosmos as the most perfect expression  of the godhead. Once we realize the extent to which certain Gnostic sects  went  in order to brand this world as a product of an evil and malignant Demiurge,  to whom we owe absolutely no allegiance, it becomes clear that Plotinus  was simply trying to temper the extreme form of an idea which he himself  shared, though in a less radical sense. The feeling of being thrown into  a hostile and alien world is a philosophically valid position from which  to begin a critique and investigation of human existence; indeed, modern  existentialist philosophers have often started from this same premise.  However, Plotinus realized that it is not the nature of the human soul  to simply escape from a realm of active engagement with external reality  (the cosmos) to a passive receptance of divine form (within the plêrôma).  The Soul, as Plotinus understands it, is an essentially creative being,  and one which understands existence on its own terms. One of the beauties  of Plotinus’ system is that everything he says concerning the nature of  the Cosmos (spiritual and physical) can equally be held of the Soul. Now  while it would be false to charge Plotinus with solipsism (or even narcissism,  as one prominent commentator has done; cf. Julia Kristeva in Hadot 1993,  p. 11), it would be correct to say that the entire Cosmos is an analogue  of the experience of the Soul, which results in the attainment of full  self-consciousness. The form of Plotinus’ system is the very form by which  the Soul naturally comes to know itself in relation to its acts; and the  expression of the Soul will always, therefore, be a philosophical expression.  When we speak of the Plotinian synthesis, then, what we are speaking of  is a natural dialectic of the Soul, which takes its own expressions into  account, no matter how faulty or incomplete they may appear in retrospect,  and weaves them into a cosmic tapestry of noetic images.
 3. Porphyry and Iamblichus
Porphyry of Tyre (ca. 233-305 CE) is the most famous pupil of Plotinus.  In addition to writing an introductory summary of his master’s theories  (the treatise entitled Launching-Points to the Realm of Mind), Porphyry  also composed the famous Isagoge, an introduction to the Categories of Aristotle, which came to exercise an immense influence on Mediaeval  Scholasticism. The extent of Porphyry’s investigative interests exceeded  that of his teacher, and his so-called “scientific” works, which survive  to this day, include a treatise on music (On Prosody), and two studies  of the astronomical and astrological theories of Claudius Ptolemy (ca.  70-140 CE), On the Harmonics, and an Introduction to The  Astronomy of Ptolemy. He wrote biographies of Pythagoras and Plotinus,  and edited and compiled the latter’s essays into six books, each containing  nine treatises, giving them the title Enneads. Unlike Plotinus,  Porphyry was interested primarily in the practical aspect of salvific striving,  and the manner in which the soul could most effectively bring about its  transference to ever higher realms of existence. This led Porphyry to develop  a doctrine of ascent to the Intellect by way of the exercise of virtue  (aretê) in the form of ‘good works’. This doctrine may owe  its genesis to Porphyry’s supposed early adherence to Christianity, as  attested by the historian Socrates, and suggested by St. Augustine (cf.  Copleston 1962, p. 218). If Porphyry had, at some point, been a Christian,  this would account for his belief in the soul’s objective relation to the  divine Mind — an idea shared by Origen, whom Porphyry knew as a youth  (cf. Eusebius, The History of the Church, p. 195) — and would explain  his quite un-Plotinian belief in a gradual progress toward perfection,  as opposed to the ‘instant salvation’ proposed by Plotinus (cf. Ennead IV.8.4).
Iamblichus of Apamea (d. ca. 330 CE) was a student of Porphyry.  He departed from his teacher on more than a few points, most notably in  his insistence on demoting Plotinus’ One (which Porphyry left unscathed,  as it were) to the level of kosmos noêtos, which according  to Iamblichus generates the intellectual realm (kosmos noêros).  In this regard, Iamblichus can be said to have either severely misunderstood,  or neglected to even attempt to understand, Plotinus on the important doctrine  of contemplation (see above).  This view led Iamblichus to posit a Supreme One even higher than the One  of Plotinus, which generates the Intellectual Cosmos, and yet remains beyond  all predication and determinacy. Iamblichus also made a tripartite division  of Soul, positing a cosmic or All-Soul, and two lesser souls, corresponding  to the rational and irrational faculties, respectively. This somewhat gratuitous  skewing of the Plotinian noetic realm also led Iamblichus to posit an array  of intermediate spiritual beings between the lower souls and the intelligible  realm — daemons, the souls of heroes, and angels of all sorts.  By placing so much distance between the earthly soul and the intelligible  realm, Iamblichus made it difficult for the would-be philosopher to gain  an intuitive knowledge of the higher Soul, although he insisted that everyone  possesses such knowledge, coupled with an innate desire for the Good. In  place of the vivid dialectic of Plotinus, Iamblichus established the practice  of theurgy (theourgia), which he insists does not draw the gods  down to man, but rather renders humankind, “who through generation are  born subject to passion, pure and unchangeable” (On the Mysteries I.12.42; in Fowden 1986, p. 133). Whereas “likeness to God” had meant,  for Plotinus, a recollection and perfection of one’s own divine nature  (which is, in the last analysis, identical to  nous; cf. Ennead III.4), for Iamblichus the relation of humankind to the divine is one of  subordinate to superior, and so the pagan religious piety that Plotinus  had scorned — “Let the gods come to me, and not I to them,” he had once  said (cf. Porphyry, Life of Plotinus 10) — returns to philosophy  with a vengeance. Iamblichus is best known for his lengthy treatise On  the Mysteries. Like Porphyry, he also wrote a biography of Pythagoras.
 a. The Nature of the Soul
In his introduction to the philosophy of Plotinus, entitled Launching-Points  to the Realm of Mind, Porphyry remarks that the inclination of the  incorporeal Soul toward corporeality “constitutes a second nature [the  irrational soul], which unites with the body” (Launching-Points 18 [1]). This remark is supposedly a commentary on Ennead IV.2,  where Plotinus discusses the relation of the individual soul to the All-Soul.  While it is true that Plotinus often speaks of the individual soul as being  independent of the highest Soul, he does this for illustrative purposes,  in order to show how far into forgetfulness the soul that has become enamored  of its act may fall. Yet Plotinus insists time and again that the individual  soul and the All-Soul are one (cf. esp.  Ennead IV.1), and that Nature  is the Soul’s expressive act (see  above). Irrationality does not constitute, for Plotinus, a “second  nature,” but is merely a flawed exercise of rationality — that is, doxa untempered  by epistêmê — on the part of the individual soul. Furthermore,  the individual soul, which comes to unite with corporeality, governs and  controls the body, making possible discursive knowledge as well as sense-perception.  Uncontrolled pathos is what Plotinus calls irrationality; the soul  brings aisthêsis (perceptive judgment) to corporeality, and  so prevents it from sinking into irrational passivity. So what led Porphyry  to make such an interpretative error, if error it was? It is quite possible  that Porphyry had arrived at his own conclusions about the Soul, and tried  to square his own theory with what Plotinus actually taught. One clue to  the reason for the ‘misunderstanding’ may possibly lie in Porphyry’s early  involvement with Christianity. While Porphyry himself never tells us that  he had been a Christian, Augustine speaks of him as if he were an apostate,  and the historian Socrates states outright that Porphyry had once been  of the Christian faith, telling us that he left the fold in disgust after  being assaulted by a rowdy band of Christians in Caesarea (Copleston 1962,  p. 218). In any case, it is certain that he was acquainted with Plotinus’  older contemporary, the Christian Origen, and that he had been exposed  to Christian doctrine. Indeed, his own spirited attack on Christianity  (“Fifteen Arguments Against the Christians,” now preserved only in fragments)  shows him to have possessed a wide knowledge of Holy Scripture, remarkable  for a ‘pagan’ philosopher of that era. Porphyry’s exposure to Christian  doctrine, then, would have left him with a view of salvation quite different  from that of Plotinus, who seems never to have paid Christianity much mind.  The best evidence we have for this explanation is Porphyry’s own theory  of salvation — and it is remarkably similar to what we find in Origen!  Porphyry’s salvation theory is dependent, like Origen’s, on a notion of  the soul’s objective relation to God, and its consequent striving, not  to actualize its own divine potentiality, but to attain a level of virtue  that makes it capable of partaking fully of the divine essence. This is  accomplished through the exercise of virtue, which sets the soul on a gradual  course of progress toward the highest Good. Beginning with simple ‘practical  virtues’ (politikai arêtai) the soul gradually rises to higher  levels, eventually attaining what Porphyry calls the paradeigmatikai  arêtai or ‘exemplary virtues’ which make of the soul a living  expression of the divine Mind (cf. Porphyry, Letter to Marcella 29). Note that Porphyry stops the soul’s ascent at nous, and presumably  holds that the ‘saved’ soul will eternally contemplate the infinite power  of the One. If Porphyry’s concern had been with the preservation of personality,  then this explanation makes some sense. However, it is more likely that  the true reason for Porphyry’s rejection of the radically ‘hubristic’ theory  (at least to pietistic pagans) of the nature of the individual soul held  by Plotinus was a result of his intention to restore dignity to the traditional  religion of the Greeks (which had come under attack not only by Plotinus,  but by Christians as well). Evidence of such a program resides in Porphyry’s  allegorical interpretations of Homer and traditional cultic practice, as  well as his possibly apologetic work on Philosophy from Oracles (now lost). Compared to Plotinus, then, Porphyry was quite the conservative,  concerned as he was with maintaining the ancient view of humankind’s relatively  humble position in the cosmic hierarchy, over against Plotinus’ view that  the soul is a god, owing little more than a passing nod to its ‘noble brethren’  in the heavens.
 i. The (re)turn to Astrology
One of the results of Porphyry’s conservative position toward traditional  religious practice and belief was the ‘return’ to the doctrine that the stars and planets are capable of affecting and ordering human life. Plotinus  argued that since the individual soul is one with the All-Soul, it is in  essence a co-creator of the Cosmos, and therefore not really subject to  the laws governing the Cosmos — for the soul is the source and agent of  those laws! Therefore, a belief in astrology was, for Plotinus, absurd,  since if the soul turned to beings dependent upon its own law — i.e.,  the stars and planets — in order to know itself, then it would only end  up knowing aspects of its own act, and would never return to itself in  full self-consciousness. Furthermore, as we have seen, Plotinian salvation  was instantly available to the soul, if only it would turn its mind to  “essential being” (see above); because  of this, Plotinus saw no reason to bring the stars and planets into the  picture. For Porphyry, however, who believed that the soul must gradually  work toward salvation, a knowledge of the operations of the heavenly bodies  and their relation to humankind would have been an important tool in gaining  ever higher levels of virtue. In fact, Porphyry seems to have held the  view that the soul receives certain “powers” from each of the planets —  right judgment from Saturn, proper exercise of the will from Jupiter, impulse  from Mars, opinion and imagination from the Sun, and (what else?) sensuous  desire from Venus; from the Moon the soul receives the power of physical  production (cf. Hegel, p. 430) — and that these powers enable to the soul  to know things both earthly and heavenly. This theoretical knowledge of  the powers of the planets, then, would have made the more practical knowledge  of astrology quite useful and meaningful for an individual soul seeking  to know itself as such. The usefulness of astrology for Porphyry, in this  regard, probably resided in its ability to permit an individual, through  an analysis of his birth chart, to know which planet — and therefore which  “power” — exercised the dominant influence on his life. In keeping with  the ancient Greek doctrine of the “golden mean,” the task of the individual  would then be to work to bring to the fore those other “powers” — each  present to a lesser degree in the soul, but still active — and thereby  achieve a balance or sôphrosunê that would render the  soul more capable of sharing in the divine Mind. The art of astrology,  it must be remembered, was in wide practice in the Hellenistic world, and  Plotinus’ rejection of it was an exception that was by no means the rule.  Plotinus’ views on astrology apparently found few adherents, even among  Platonists, for we see not only Porphyry, but also (to an extent) Iamblichus  and even Proclus declaring its value — the latter being responsible for  a paraphrase of Claudius Ptolemy’s astrological compendium known as the  Tetrabiblos or  sometimes simply as The Astronomy. In addition to penning a commentary  on Ptolemy’s tome, Porphyry also wrote his own  Introduction to Astronomy (by which is apparently meant “Astrology,” the modern distinction not holding  in Hellenistic times). Unfortunately, this work no longer survives intact.
(For more on this topic, see Hellenistic Astrology.)
 b. The Quest for Transcendence
The philosophy of Plotinus was highly discursive, meaning that it operated  on the assumption that the highest meaning, the most profound truth (even  a so-called mystical truth) is translatable, necessarily, into language;  and furthermore, that any and every experience only attains its full value  as meaning when it has reached expression in the form of language.  This idea, of course, placed the One always beyond the discursive understanding  of the human soul, since the One was proclaimed, by Plotinus, to be not  only beyond discursive knowledge, but also the very source and possibility of such knowledge. According to Plotinus, then, any time the individual  soul expresses a certain truth in language, this very act is representative  of the power of the One. This notion of the simultaneous intimate proximity  of the One to the soul, and, paradoxically, its extreme transcendence and  ineffability, is possible only within the confines of a purely subjective  and introspective philosophy like that of Plotinus; and since such a philosophy,  by its very nature, cannot appeal to common, external perceptions, it is  destined to remain the sole provenance of the sensitive and enlightened  few. Porphyry did not want to admit this, and so he found himself seeking,  as St. Augustine tells us, “a universal way (universalem viam) for  the liberation of the soul” (City of God 10.32, in Fowden, p. 132),  believing, as he did, that no such way had yet been discovered by or within  philosophy. This did not imply, for Porphyry, a wholesale rejection of  the Plotinian dialectic in favor of a more esoteric process of salvation;  but it did lead Porphyry (see above)  to look to astrology as a means of orienting the soul toward its place  in the cosmos, and thereby allowing it to achieve the desired salvation  in the most efficacious manner possible. Iamblichus, on the other hand,  rejected even Porphyry’s approach, in favor of a path toward the divinity  that is more worthy of priests (hieratikoi) than philosophers; for  Iamblichus believed that not only the One, but all the gods and demi-gods,  exceed and transcend the individual soul, making it necessary for the soul  seeking salvation to call upon the superior beings to aid it in its progress.  This is accomplished, Iamblichus tells us, by “the perfective operation  of unspeakable acts (erga) correctly performed … acts which are  beyond all understanding (huper pasan noêsin)” and which are  “intelligible only to the gods” (On the Mysteries II.11.96-7, in  Fowden, p. 132). These ritualistic acts, and the ‘logic’ underlying them,  Iamblichus terms “theurgy” (theourgia). These theurgic acts are  necessary, for Iamblichus, because he is convinced that philosophy, which  is based solely upon thought (ennoia) — and thought, we must remember,  is always an accomplishment of the individual mind, and hence discursive  — is unable to reach that which is beyond thought. The practice  of theurgy, then, becomes a way for the soul to experience the presence  of the divinity, instead of merely thinking or conceptualizing the godhead.  Porphyry took issue with this view, in his Letter to Anebo, which  is really a criticism of the ideas of his pupil, Iamblichus, where he stated  that, since theurgy is a physical process, it cannot possibly translate  into a spiritual effect. Iamblichus’ On the Mysteries was written  as a reply to Porphyry’s criticisms, but the defense of the pupil did not  succeed in vanquishing the persistent attacks of the master. While both  Porphyry and Iamblichus recognized, to a lesser and greater extent, respectively,  the limitations of the Plotinian dialectic, Porphyry held firm to the idea  that since the divinity is immaterial it can only be grasped in a noetic  fashion — i.e., discursively (and even astrology, in spite of its mediative  capacity, is still an intellectual exercise, open to dialectic and narratization);  Iamblichus, adhering roughly to the same view, nevertheless argued that  the human soul must not think god on its own terms, but must allow itself  to be transformed by the penetrating essence of god, of which the soul  partakes through rituals intended to transform the particularized, fragmented  soul into a being that is “pure and unchangeable” (cf. On the Mysteries I.12.42; Fowden, p. 133).
 i. Theurgy and the Distrust of Dialectic
According to the schema of Plotinian dialectic, the ‘stance’ of the  individual soul is the sole source of truth certainty, being a judging  faculty dependent always upon the higher Soul. From the perspective of  one who believes that the soul is immersed in Nature, instead of recognizing,  as Plotinus did, the soul’s status as an intimate governor of Nature (which  is the Soul’s own act), dialectic may very well appear as a solipsistic  (and therefore faulty) attempt on the part of an individual mind to know  its reality by imposing conceptual structures and strictures upon the phenomena  that constitute this reality. Iamblichus believed that since every individual  soul is immersed in the ‘bodily element,’ no soul is capable of understanding  the divine nature through the pure exercise of human reason — for reason  itself, at the level of the human soul-body composite, is tainted by the  changeable nature of matter, and therefore incapable of rising to that  perfect knowledge that is beyond all change (cp. Plato, Phaedrus 247e). Dialectic, then, as the soul’s attempt to know reality, is seen  by Iamblichus as an attempt by an already fallen being to lead itself up  out of the very locus of its own forgetfulness. Now Iamblichus does not  completely reject dialectical reason; he simply requests that it be tempered  by an appeal to intermediate divinities, who will aid the fallen soul in  its ascent back towards the Supreme Good. The practice of ritualistic theurgy  is the medium by which the fallen soul ascends to a point at which it becomes  capable of engaging in a meaningful dialectic with the divinity. This dependence  upon higher powers nevertheless negates the soul’s own innate ability to  think itself as god, and so we may say that Iamblichus’ ideas represent  a decisive break with the philosophy of Plotinus.
 4. Proclus and Pseudo-Dionysius
Proclus (410-485 CE) is, next to Plotinus, the most accomplished  and rigorous of the Neoplatonists. Born in Constantinople, he studied  philosophy in Athens, and through diligent effort rose to the rank of head  teacher or ‘scholarch’ of that great school. In addition to his accomplishments  in philosophy, Proclus was also a religious universalist, who had himself  initiated into all the mystery religions being practiced during his time.  This was doubtless due to the influence of Iamblichus, whom Proclus held  in high esteem (cf. Proclus, Theology of Plato III; in Hegel, p.  432). The philosophical expression of Proclus is more precise and logically  ordered than that of Plotinus. Indeed, Proclus posits the Intellect (nous)  as the culmination of the productive act (paragein) of the One;  this is in opposition to Plotinus, who described the Intellect as proceeding  directly from the One, thereby placing Mind before Thought, and so making  thought the process by which the Intellect becomes alienated from itself,  thus requiring the salvific act in order to attain the fulfillment of Being,  which is, for Plotinus, the return of Intellect to itself. Proclus understands  the movement of existence as a tripartite progression beginning with an  abstract unity, passing into a multiplicity that is identified with Life,  and returning again to a unity that is no longer merely abstract, but now  actualized as an eternal manifestation of the godhead. What constituted,  for Plotinus, the salvific drama of human existence is, for Proclus, simply  the logical, natural order of things. However, by thus removing the yearning  for salvation from human existence, as something to be accomplished, positively,  Proclus is ignoring or overly intellectualizing, if you will, an existential  aspect of human existence that is as real as it is powerful. Plotinus recognized  the importance of the salvific drive for the realization of true philosophy,  making philosophy a means to an end; Proclus utilizes philosophy, rather,  more in the manner of a useful, descriptive language by which a thinker  may describe the essential realities of a merely contingent existence.  In this sense, Proclus is more faithful to the ‘letter’ of Plato’s Dialogues;  but for this same reason he fails to rise to the ‘spirit’ of the Platonic  philosophy. Proclus’ major works include commentaries on Plato’s Timaeus,  Republic,  Parmenides,  Alcibiades  I, and the Cratylus. He also wrote treatises on the Theology  of Plato, On Providence, and On the Subsistence of Evil.  His most important work is undoubtedly the Elements of Theology,  which contains the clearest exposition of his ideas.
 a. Being — Becoming — Being
We found, in Plotinus, an explanation and expression of a cosmos that  involved a gradual development from all but static unity toward eventual  alienation — a moment at which the active soul must make the profound decision to  renounce autonomous existence and re-merge with the source of all Being,  or else remain forever in the darkness of forgetfulness and error. Salvation,  for Plotinus, was relatively easy to accomplish, but never guaranteed.  For Proclus, on the other hand, the arkhê or ‘ruling beginning’  of all Life is the ‘One-in-itself’ (to auto hen), or that which  is responsible for the ordering of all existents, insofar as existence  is, in the last analysis, the sovereign act or expression of this primordial  unity or monad. The expression of this One is perfectly balanced,  being a trinity containing, as distinct expressions, each moment of self-realization  of this One; and each of these moments, according to Proclus, have the  structure of yet another trinity. The first trinity corresponds to the limit, which is the guide and reference-point of all further manifestations;  the second to the unlimited, which is also Life or the productive  power (dunamis); and the third, finally, to the ‘mixture’ (mikton,  diakosmos), which is the self-reflective  moment of return during  which the soul realizes itself as a thinking — i.e., living —  entity. Thought is, therefore, the culmination of Life and the fulfillment  of Being. Thought is also the reason (logos) that binds these triadic  unities together in a grand harmonious plêrôma, if you  will. Being, for Proclus, is that divine self-presence, “shut up without  development and maintained in strict isolation” (Hegel, p. 446) which is  the object of Life’s thinking; this ‘object’ gives rise to that thinking  which leads, eventually, to understanding (nous), which is the thought  of being, and appears (ekphanôs), always, as ‘being’s begetter’.  When the circle is completed, and reflected upon, logically, we are met  with the following onto-cosmological schema: thought (noêtos,  also known as ‘Being’) giving rise to its “negative” which is thinking  (Hegel, p. 393) and the thought ‘it is’ (noêtos kai noêros),  produces its own precise reflection — ‘pure thinking’ — and this reflection  is the very manifestation (phanerôsis) of the deity within  the fluctuating arena of individual souls. Being is eternal and static  precisely because it always returns to itself as Being; and ‘Becoming’is  the conceptual term for this process, which involves the cyclical play  between that which is and is not, at any given time. “[T]he thought of  every man is identical with the existence of every man, and each is both  the thought and the existence” (Proclus, Platonic Theology III.,  in Hegel, p. 449). The autonomous drive toward dissolution, which is so  germane to the soul as such, is wiped away by Proclus, for his dialectic  is impeccably clean. However, he does not account for the yearning for  the infinite (as does Plotinus) and the consequent existential desire for  productive power falls on its face before the supreme god of autonomous  creation — which draws all existents into its primeval web of dissolution.
 b. The God Beyond Being
Very little is known about the life of the so-called Pseudo-Dionysius.  For many centuries, the writings of this mystical philosopher were believed  to have been from the pen of none other Dionysius, the disciple of St.  Paul. Later scholarship has shed considerable doubt on this claim, and  most modern scholars believe this author to have been active during the  late fifth century CE. Indeed, the earliest reference to the Dionysian  Corpus that we possess is from 533 CE. There is no mention of this author’s  work before this date. Careful study of the Pseudo-Dionysian writings has  uncovered many parallels between the theurgical doctrines of Iamblichus,  and the triadic metaphysical schema of Proclus. Yet what we witness in  these writings is the attempt by a thinker who is at once religiously sensitive  and philosophically engaged to bring the highly developed Platonism of  his time into line with a Christian theological tradition that was apparently  persisting on the fringes of orthodoxy. To this extent, we may refer to  the Pseudo-Dionysius as a ‘decadent,’ for he (or she?) was writing at a  time when the heyday of Platonism had attained the status of a palaios  logos (‘ancient teaching’) to be, not merely commented upon, but savored as an aesthetic monument to an era already long past. It is important to  note, in this regard, that the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius do not contain  any theoretical arguments or dialectical moments, but simply many subtle  variations on the apophatic/kataphatic theology for which our writer is  renowned. Indeed, he writes as if his readers already know, and  are merely in need of clarification. His message is quite simple, and is  manifestly distilled from the often cumbersome doctrines of earlier thinkers  (especially Iamblichus and Proclus). Pseudo-Dionysius professes a God who  is beyond all distinctions, and who even transcends the means utilized  by human beings to reach Him. For Pseudo-Dionysius, the Holy Trinity (which  is probably analogous to Proclus’ highest trinity, see  above) serves as a “guide” to the human being who seeks not only to  know but to unite with “him who is beyond all being and knowledge”  (Pseudo-Dionysius, The Mystical Theology 997A-1000A, tr.  C. Luibheid 1987). In the expression of the Pseudo-Dionysius the yearning  for the infinite reaches a poetical form that at once fulfills and exceeds  philosophy.
 5. Appendix:`The Renaissance Platonists
After the closing of the Neoplatonic Academy in Athens by the Emperor  Justinian in 529 CE, Platonism ceased to be a living philosophy. Due to  the efforts of the Christian philosopher Boethius (480-525 CE),  who translated Porphyry’s Isagoge, and composed numerous original  works as well, the Middle Ages received a faint glimmer of the ancient  glories of the Platonic philosophy. St. Augustine, also, was responsible  for imparting a sense of Neoplatonic doctrine to the Latin West, but this  was by way of commentary and critique, and not in any way a systematic  exposition of the philosophy. Generally speaking, it is safe to say that  the European Middle Ages remained in the grip of Aristotelianism until  the early Renaissance, when certain brilliant Italian thinkers began to  rediscover, translate, and expound upon the original texts of Platonism.  Chief among these thinkers were Marsilio Ficino (1433-1492) and  Pico  della Mirandola (1463-1494). Ficino produced fine Latin translations  of Plato’s Dialogues, the Enneads of Plotinus, and numerous  works by Porphyry, Iamblichus, Proclus,  Pseudo-Dionysius,  and many others. In addition to his scholarly ability, Ficino was also  a fine commentator and philosopher in his own right. His brilliant essay  on Five Questions Concerning The Mind is a concise summary of general  Neoplatonic doctrine, based upon Ficino’s own view that the lot of the  human soul is to inquire into its own nature, and that since this inquiry  causes the human soul to experience misery, the soul must do everything  it can to transcend the physical body and live a life worthy of the blessed  angels (cf. Cassirer, et. al. (ed) 1948, p. 211-212). Giovanni Pico, the  Count of Mirandola, was a colorful figure who lived a short life, fraught  with strife. He roused the ire of the papacy by composing a voluminous  work defending nine-hundred theses drawn from his vast reading of the Ancients;  thirteen of these theses were deemed heretical by the papacy, and yet Pico  refused to change or withdraw a single one. Like his friend Ficino, Pico  was a devotee of ancient wisdom, drawing not only upon the Platonic canon,  but also upon the Pre-Socratic literature and the Hermetic Corpus, especially  the Poimandres. Pico’s most famous work is the Oration on the  Dignity of Man, in which he eloquently states his learned view that  humankind was created by God “as a creature of indeterminate nature,” possessed  of the unique ability to ascend or descend on the scale of Being through  the autonomous exercise of free will (Oration 3, in Cassirer, et.  al. (ed) 1948, p. 224). Pico’s view of free will was quite different from  that expressed by Plotinus, and indeed most other Neoplatonists, and it  came as no surprise when Pico composed a treatise On Being and the One which ended on Aristotelian terms, declaring the One to be coincident with  or persisting amidst Being — a wholly un-Platonic doctrine. With Ficino,  then, we may say that Platonism achieved a brief moment of archaic glory,  while with Pico, it was plunged once again into the quagmire of self-referential  empiricism.
 6. References and Further Reading

Cassirer, Ernst; Kristeller, Paul Oskar; Randall, John Herman Jr. (editors)  The  Renaissance Philosophy of Man (University of Chicago Press 1948).
Cooper, John M. (ed.), Plato: Complete Works (Hackett Publishing  1997).
Copleston S.J., Frederick, A History of Philosophy (vol. I, part  II): Greece and Rome (Image Books 1962).
Dillon, John (1977), The Middle Platonists (Cornell University  Press).
Eusebius (tr. G.A. Williamson 1965), The History of the Church (Penguin Books).
Fowden, Garth, The Egyptian Hermes: A Historical Approach To The  Late Pagan Mind (Cambridge University Press 1986).
Hadot, Pierre (tr. M. Chase), Plotinus, or The Simplicity of Vision (University of Chicago Press 1993).
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (tr. E.S. Haldane and Frances H. Simson),  Lectures  on the History of Philosophy (vol. II): Plato And The Platonists (Bison Books 1995).
Jaeger, Werner, Early Christianity and Greek Paideia (Harvard  University Press 1961).
Layton, Bentley (1987), The Gnostic Scriptures (Doubleday: The  Anchor Bible Reference Library).
O’Brien S.J., Elmer (1964), The Essential Plotinus: Representative  Treatises From The Enneads (Hackett Publishing).
Origen of Alexandria, Commentary on John, tr. in The  Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. X. (Eerdmans 1979, reprint).
Origen of Alexandria, On First Principles [De Principiis], tr.  in  The Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. IV. (Eerdmans 1979, reprint).
Philo of Alexandria (tr. F.H. Colson and G.H. Whitaker), On the Creation  of the World [De Opificio Mundi], in vol. 1 of The Loeb Classical Library  edition of Philo (Harvard University Press 1929).
Plotinus (tr. A.H. Armstrong), The Enneads, in seven volumes  (Loeb Classical Library: Harvard University Press 1966).
Porphyry (tr. K. Guthrie), Launching-Points to the Realm of Mind [Pros  ta noeta aphorismoi] (Phanes Press 1988).
Porphyry (tr. A. Zimmern), Porphyry’s Letter to His Wife Marcella  Concerning the Life of Philosophy and the Ascent to the Gods (Phanes  Press 1986).
Porphyry (tr. A.H. Armstrong), Life of Plotinus [Vita Plotini],  in volume one of the Loeb Classical Library edition of Plotinus (Harvard  University Press 1966).
Proclus (tr. T. Taylor), Lost Fragments of Proclus (Wizards Bookshelf  1988).
Proclus (tr. T. Taylor), Ten Doubts Concerning Providence, and  On  the Subsistence of Evil (Ares Publishers 1980).
Pseudo-Dionysius (tr. C. Luibheid 1987), Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete  Works (Paulist Press).

Author Information
Edward Moore
Email: patristics@gmail.com
St. Elias School of Orthodox Theology
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







