








Hippocrates | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Hippocrates (c. 450—c. 380 B.C.E.)
Hippocrates of Cos was said to have lived sometime between 450 BCE to 380 BCE. He was a physician, and the     writings of the Corpus Hippocraticum provide a wealth of information on biomedical methodology and offer     one of the first reflective codes of professional ethics. Though Plato (a contemporary) makes reference to Hippocrates (Phaedrus  270a and elsewhere), it is generally believed that most of the writings in the Corpus Hippocraticum  are actually the work of a number of different writers.  By convention of time, place and general approach a common name of ‘Hippocrates’ was assigned to the lot (without distinguishing those of the historical Hippocrates).  Hippocrates and the other associated writers provide the modern student with a number of different sorts of insights.
On the biomedical methodology side, these writings provide the most detailed biomedical observations to date in the Western world.  They also offer causal speculations that can be knitted together to form a theoretical framework for diagnosis and treatment.  On the ethical side, their code of professional ethics is so well structured that it continues to stand as a model for other professions.
Table of Contents

 Biomedical Methodology 

 The Four Humors 
 An Ancient Debate: Are General Causal Theories Beneficial? 
 Prognosis and Treatment 
 The Hippocratic Writings and Hellenistic Medicine 


 Ethics 

 The Oath 
 The Oath and Modern Codes of Conduct 


 References and Further Reading

Primary Sources
Secondary Sources 
Published Conferences on Hippocrates



 1. Biomedical Methodology
One way to parse the groups of Hippocratic writers revolves around their geographical origins: Cos vs. Cnidos.      Though this classification is controversial, it is useful (whether one accepts the literal geographical     demarcation) to mark some clear distinctions in the Hippocratic body of writing.  It appears to be the case that     the Cos writers sought to create general biomedical “laws” that for the most part would give the     explanation for why someone was sick.  Any physician might make reference to these “laws” and thereby have     an etiology for the disease, and by extension a strategy for treatment.
 a. The Four Humors
The most historically prominent theoretical scheme of the Coan writers was the doctrine of the four humors of     the body: blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile (or sometimes serum).  Health was defined as the balance of     the four humors.  Disease was defined as the imbalance of the humors.  When imbalance occurred, then the physician     might intervene by making a correction to bring the body back into balance.  For example, if the individual were     too full of phlegm (making her phlegmatic or lethargic), then the phlegm must be countered.  Citrus fruit was     thought to be a counter-acting agent. Thus, if one feels lethargic, increasing one’s citrus intake will re-create     balance.  The treatment is, in fact, generally effective. Moderns might describe the therapy differently by     ascribing the effect to vitamin-C, phosphorus, and natural sugar.  This example illustrates the scope of the     Hippocratic physician in this context: something like a cross between the modern roles of an herbalist dietician     and a personal trainer.  Nonetheless, the cures that were dictated by the four humor theory seemed to work well     enough for this theory to extend to the nineteenth century (in various guises).
 b. An Ancient Debate: Are General Causal Theories Beneficial?
Other biomedical writers–some say from Cnidos–held that strict empirical principles did not allow scientists     to go far beyond the data.  It was a better methodology for the biomedical practitioner to stay as close as     possible to the data that were before him.  This meant that each patient would be seen in her particularity.  Such     a method required careful trial and error observation and only slight manipulation of the patient in the form of     treatment.
There was a great conflict in the ancient world concerning the status of observational     conclusions (the empirically concrete). Should they be given in their specificity and remain as disparate,     individual accounts, or should they be grouped and more general principles drawn from them?   In this instance it     was very much in dispute whether it was better to set out individual reports of particular illnesses (case     studies) or to try to draw general rules from the particulars.
Take, for example Epidemics III:
THE MORTIFICATION OF THE GANGRENE.  If the gangrene mortifies itself there is a head     pain and frequently a scratchy throat; the sick limb loses sensation, a feeling of cold comes to the head and the     affected limb sweats.  He suddenly loses his speech and blows blood from his nose as he becomes pale.  If the     disease takes hold of the patient with a weak force, he recovers the discharged blood.  If the disease takes him     with a strong force, he dies promptly.  In this case one induces sneezing by pleasant substances; one evacuates by     the upper and lower.  Alternatively those odors will be a little active. The soup will be light and hot.  Wine is     absolutely forbidden.  (Epidemics  III, Littré 7, p. 123)
In this passage one is     left merely with symptoms and treatment.  But when one practices medicine in this way there are severe     restrictions.  For the disease is seen as a collection of symptoms.  The cure can only be guessed at unless it has     been previously written down in a manual.  When a physician is confronted with a novel disease he must find a     similar set of symptoms and use that treatment.  This aspect of the “trial and error” method brought harsh rebuke     from Galen.
The point is that they [the Cnidians] looked at the varieties of symptoms which     change for many reasons and failed to consider the specificity of the dispositions, as did Hippocrates, who used     for their discovery a method only by using which, one can find the number of diseases . . . . Hippocrates censures     the Cnidian physicians for their ignorance of the genera and species of diseases, and he points out the divisions     by which what seems to be one becomes many by being divided. (Corpus Medicorum Graecorum 5.9.1, pp.     121-22; Claudii Galeni De Placitis Hippocratis et Platonis,  ed. I. Mueller (Lipsiae, 1874), p. 776)
 c. Prognosis and Treatment
What was it that made the Cnidians different from the Coan writers?  This can be found by examining the two     steps in any medical practice: Prognosis and Treatment.  In the Coan work, On Prognosis,  the writer     suggests that prognosis consists in knowing the patient’s condition in the past, present, and the future. Now how     could a physician know this?  Well, this could also have been part of a handbook catalogued through similar case     studies.  The practitioner could memorize each individual description. Next, the practitioner could add to this     his own experience.  But the problem is that each case is individual.  It possesses “nature” only in the sense of     possessing a unique set of properties.  The practitioner would not be in a good position to treat novel cases.      When confronted with a novel case, the practitioner is left with seeking similar  cases.  The implied     premise is that similar cases call for similar remedies.  The more the experience, the more refined the     practitioner can be in balancing similar cases with the remedies.
Obviously, much rides on the word,     ‘similar.’  Is a rich body of knowledge enough?  Is it not also requisite to have a classification procedure,     which itself implies rules of classification.  And how does one select and justify such rules?  It would seem that     we are pressed backwards toward archai, starting points for some axiomatic system (à la Aristotle’s     Posterior Analytics,  I, i-ii).
Such an alternative to the empiricist program aims at     establishing a theory of causes that underlie individual cases. These causes such as the “hot,” “cold,” “wet,” and     “dry” or “the four humors” are more general because they seek to describe a different sense of the nature of     disease.  ‘Nature’ in this context refers to the sort of condition that comes from observations based upon the     individuality of actual patients. For here we are interested in the genera and species of the disease in question.      Such an exercise creates a classification of  types  of diseases.
But for this classification     not to be based upon accidental characteristics, it is requisite that it include the causal factors that operate     to bring about the disease in the first place.  This is really the foundational or  causal  network     that is responsible for the disease’s very existence.  Such an understanding of “nature” moves away from     individuals and their “similarities” toward the theoretical.  Understood in this way, the nature  of     disease is a regulating factor upon the prognosis of the physician.  This nature must be understood in order to     offer treatment.  In this sense, nature is the overarching principles that give an account of the mechanism of the     disease.  What made the Coan writers so attractive to Galen was that they investigated various senses of nature     while the Cnidians confined themselves only to the data as they presented themselves.
 d. The Hippocratic Writings and Hellenistic Medicine
The Hippocratic writings were influential in the development of later biomedical practitioners.  The three     principal Hellenistic schools:  Dogmatists, Methodists, and the Empirics all hearken back in various ways to the     Hippocratic writings.  Many debates in the Hippocratic writings (such as the “preformation” vs. “epigenesis”     debate) are picked-up again and given a twist according to the predilections of the Hellenistic schools.  Galen,     himself, often cites Hippocrates, aka “the Hippocratic writers,” as the point of departure for his own theory     building.  Thus, it would be fair to say that not only were the Hippocratic writers the first systematic     biomedical writers in the Western tradition, but also the most influential to later writers.
 2. Ethics
In the time of Hippocrates (and the other associated writers) there were many who wanted to pass themselves off     as physicians. These individuals had not gone through an apprenticeship and thus had no specialized (professional)     knowledge.  Because of this, these con men went about fleecing customers.  This created a problem for those who     entered the study of medicine the traditional way.  These more careful practitioners had to distinguish themselves     from the charlatans.  The way most professions try to deal with this sort of problem and the legitimate problems     that arise during practice is to create codes of conduct and structures of accreditation.  The most famous of     these in the biomedical tradition is: The Oath of Hippocrates.
 a. The Oath
By Apollo (the physician), by Asclepius (god of healing), by Hygeia (god of health), by Panacea (god     of remedy), and all the gods and goddesses, together as witnesses, I hereby swear that I will carry out, inasmuch     as I am able and true to my considered judgment, this oath and the ensuing duties:

To hold my     teacher in this art on a par with my parents.  To make my teacher a partner in my livelihood To look after my     teacher and financially share with her/him when s/he is in need.  To consider him/her as a brother/sister along     with his/her family.  To teach his/her family the art of medicine, if they want to learn it, without tuition or     any other conditions of service.   To impart all the lessons necessary to practice medicine to my own sons and     daughters, the sons and daughters of my teacher and to my own students, who have taken this oath-but to no one     else.
 I will help the sick according to my skill and judgment, but never with an intent to do harm or injury     to another.
 I will never administer poison to anyone-even when asked to do so.  Nor will I ever suggest a way     that others (even the patient) could do so.  Similarly, I will never induce an abortion.  Instead, I will keep     holy my life and art.
 I will not engage in surgery–not even upon suffers from stone, but will withdraw in     favor of others who do this work.
 Whoever I visit, rich or poor, I will concern myself with the well being of     the sick.  I will commit no intentional misdeeds, nor any other harmful action such as engaging in sexual     relations with my patients (regardless of their status).
 Whatever I hear or see in the course of my     professional duties (or even outside the course of treatment) regarding my patients is strictly confidential and I     will not allow it to be spread about. But instead, will hold these as holy secrets.

Now if I carry out this     oath and not break its injunctions, may I enjoy a good life and may my reputation be pure and honored for all     generations. But if I fail and break this oath, then may the opposite befall me.
Within this oath are     both a moral code for the profession of medicine and the outlines of a system of accreditation for new physicians     via an apprenticeship.  These two functions went a long way to establishing medicine as a profession that ordinary     people could trust.
 b. The Oath and Modern Codes of Conduct
In the modern world there are many professional codes of conduct. One could look at the American Medical     Association Code, the American Bar Association Code, et al. However, the Hippocratic Oath set the standard of what     a professional code is.  A few key features that will tell why one should accept or reject such codes as solutions     to the problems that have been outlined.
It is this author’s opinion that among professional codes,     the Hippocratic Oath is a good one.  It balances between very specific prohibitions such as not administering     poison or not having sexual relations with one’s patients, to more general principles such as “I will concern     myself with the well being of the sick.” and “do no harm.”  These general principles are very useful because they     govern a larger domain than simply prohibiting a particular action. These principles are not set out without     context.  Instead they are put into the context medicine’s mission.
Beginning in #1 the tone is set that     medicine is an art that is “given by the gods.”  It is an esoteric art that is to be reserved for those who are     willing to commit to the provisions of the code. Thus, it is not open to everyone.  This fulfills the condition of     specialized knowledge mentioned earlier.  It is for the sake of doing good to others and always avoiding harm.      This fulfills the condition of providing a service for others.
Thirdly, the code ties itself to the     larger moral tradition, “I will commit no intentional misdeeds.”  Whereas “harm” has a direct link to manner in     which medicine is practiced, “misdeeds” links the physician to the larger moral tradition.  There is no possible     hiding in the shared community perspective alone.
These three factors are the basis of any good     professional code.
A Good Professional Code Should Contain

A specific listing of common     abuses.
A few general guidelines that tie behavior to the mission of the profession.
A link to general     theories of morality.

Where codes of professional ethics fail is in overemphasizing one of these elements too     highly or in ignoring an element entirely.  If codes of ethics exist in order to remedy the “inward perspective”     problem described above, then they must create links to more general “shared worldviews.”  This would put them in     the realm of common morality.
This is the most important point from my perspective.  So often the     “practice” of the profession defines its excellence in an introspective way such that the achievement of these     functional requirements is all that matters-divorced from any other visions, namely, moral visions.
In     the modern arena, many professional codes have evolved from a legal perspective.  The practitioners of the     profession do not want to go to jail or to be sued.  Thus, they create certain codes that will make this possible     situation less probable.  These sorts of codes are defensive in nature and stand at the opposite end of the     spectrum from the Hippocratic Oath.  Their mission is not to set internal standards and link to common morality,     rather they seek to “shave” as close as possible to maximizing an egoistic bottom line at the expense of the     pillars of professionalism: one’s specialized education and one’s mission to serve others.
Any code     that takes as its basis merely a negative approach designed to protect the practitioner from going to jail or     being sued is fundamentally inadequate.  This is not where one should set her sights.  Rather, we should dream     about what the profession may be-in the best of all possible worlds.  The Oath of Hippocrates thus properly sets     the mission that should drive all codes of ethics.
 3. References and Further Reading
a. Primary Sources

Corpus Medicorum Graecorum  (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag,     on-going).

New editions of selected texts with excellent notes and apparatus by various editors.


Hippocrate, Oeuvres. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1967-2008.
Hippocrates, selected works Loeb series. 8 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1923-1995.
Littré, E.  Oeuvres complète d’hippocrate  10 vols. (Paris: J. B.     Billière, 1851).

The standard edition.



b. Secondary Sources

Bourgey, Louis, Observation et experience chez les médecins de la     collection hippocratique.  (Paris: J. Vrin, 1953).

A fine connection to principles in the philosophy of     science.


Edelstein, Ludwig  Ancient Medicine.  (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press,     1967).

Still the best single treatment of ancient biomedical practitioners.


Jouanna, Jacques.     Hipporcrate Translated as Hippocrates  by M. B. DeBevoise (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University     Press, 1999).

A broad and speculative treatment.


Jouanna, Jacques.  Hippocrate: pour une archéologie d     l’école de Cnide.  (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1974).

A fine detailed analysis.


Lloyd, G.E.R.     Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle.  (New York: Norton, 1970).

An overview for the student     interested in an introduction.


Lloyd, G.E.R.  Magic, Reason, and Experience.  (Cambridge: Cambridge     University Press, 1979).

Perhaps Lloyd’s best analytical work by one of the finest practitioners of ancient     scientific history.


Smith, Wesley.  The Hippocratic Tradition.  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University     Press, 1979). Second edition revised 2002 – available online at: http://www.bium.univ-paris5.fr/amn/Hippo2.pdf (accessed on August 26, 2009).

A solid overview by an excellent scholar.


Temkin, Owsei.  Hippocrates in a World of     Pagans and Christians.  (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991).

A wide-ranging work     that stimulates in the tradition of the history of ideas.



c. Published Conferences on Hippocrates
#1  French

La Collection Hippocratique et son role dans l’histoire medicine : Colloque de Strasbourg (23-27 Octobre 1972). (1975). Paper presented at the Colloque Sur La Collection Hippocratique Et Son Role Dans l’Histoire Medicale (1972 : Strasbourg); Universite Des Sciences Humaines De Strasbourg. Centre De Recherche Sur La Proche-Orient Et La Grece Antiques. Travaux, 2.

#2	French

Joly, R., (1977). Corpus hippocraticum : Actes du Colloque Hippocratique de Mons (22-26 Septembre 1975). Paper presented at the Colloque Hippocratique, 2nd, Mons, 1975.; Éditions Universitaires De Mons. Série Sciences Humaines ; 4.

#3	French

Grmek, M. D. (1980). Hippocratica : Actes du Colloque Hippocratique de Paris, 4-9 Septembre 1978. Paper presented at the Colloque Hippocratique De Paris (1978); Colloques Internationaux Du Centre National De La Recherche Scientifique ; no 583; Variation: Colloques Internationaux Du Centre National De La Recherche Scientifique ; no 583.

#4	French

Lasserre, F., & Mudry, P. (1983). Formes de pensée dans la collection Hippocratique : Actes du IVe Colloque International Hippocratique : Lausanne, 21-26 Septembre 1981. Paper presented at the International Hippocrates Colloquium (4th : 1981 : Lausanne, Switzerland); Publications De La Faculté Des Lettres ; 26; Variation: Publications De La Faculté Des Lettres (Université De Lausanne. Faculté Des Lettres) ; 26.

#5	German

Baader, G., Winau, R., Berliner Gesellschaft für Geschichte der Medizin, Freie Universität Berlin, & Institut für Geschichte der Medizin. (1989). Die Hippokratischen epidemien : Theorie-praxis-tradition : Verhandlungen des ve Colloque International Hippocratique. Paper presented at the International Hippocrates Colloquium (5th : 1984 : Berlin, Germany); Sudhoffs Archiv,; Beihefte ; Heft 27, 441.

#6	French

Potter, P., Maloney, G., & Desautels, J. (1990). La maladie et les maladies dans la Collection Hippocratique : Actes du VIe Colloque International Hippocratique, Québec du 28 Septembre au 3 Octobre 1987. Paper presented at the Colloque International Hippocratique (6e : 1987 : Québec, Québec),

#7	Spanish

López Férez, J. A. (1992). Tratados hipocráticos : Estudios acerca de su contenido, forma e influencia : Actas del VIIe Colloque International Hippocratique, Madrid, 24-29 de Septiembre de 1990. Paper presented at the Colloque International Hippocratique (7th : 1990 : Madrid, Spain),

#8	German

Wittern, R., & Pellegrin, P. (1996). Hippokratische medizin und antike philosophie : Verhandlungen des VIII. Internationalen Hippokrates-Kolloquiums in Kloster Banz/Staffelstein vom 23.-28. Sept. 1993. Paper presented at the International Hippocrates Colloquium (8th : 1993 : Kloster Banz/Staffelstein); Medizin Der Antike; Bd. 1, 654.

#9	multiple languages

Garofalo, I. (1999). Aspetti della terapia nel corpus hippocraticum : Atti del IXe Colloque International Hippocratique, Pisa, 25-29 Settembre 1996. Paper presented at the International Hippocrates Colloquium (9th : 1996 : Pisa, Italy); Studi / Accademia Toscana Di Scienze e Lettere La Colombaria; 183; Variation: Studi (Accademia Toscana Di Scienze e Lettere La Colombaria); 183. 716.

#10	French

Thivel, A., & Zucker, A. (2002). Le normal et le pathologique dans la collection Hippocratique : Actes du xème Colloque International Hippocratique, Nice, 6-8 Octobre 1999. Paper presented at the Colloque International Hippocratique (10th : 1999 : Nice, France),

#11	English

Van der Eijk, P. J. (2005). Hippocrates in context : Papers read at the XIth international Hippocrates colloquium, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 27-31 August 2002. Paper presented at the International Hippocrates Colloquium (11th : 2002 : University of Newcastle upon Tyne); Studies in Ancient Medicine,; v. 31, 521. Retrieved from http://www.loc.gov/catdir/toc/fy0606/2006295344.html; Materials specified: Table of contents http://www.loc.gov/catdir/toc/fy0606/2006295344.html

Author Information
Michael Boylan
Email: michael.boylan@marymount.edu
Marymount University
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







