








Hempel, Carl | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Carl Gustav Hempel (1905—1997)
Carl Hempel, a German-born philosopher who immigrated to the United States, was one of the prominent philosophers of science in the twentieth century.   His paradox of the ravens—as an illustration of the paradoxes of confirmation—has been a constant challenge for theories of confirmation. Together with Paul Oppenheim, he proposed a quantitative account of degrees of confirmation of hypotheses by evidence. His deductive-nomological model of scientific explanation put explanations on the same logical footing as predictions; they are both deductive arguments. The difference is a matter of pragmatics, namely that in an explanation the argument’s conclusion is intended to be assumed true whereas in a prediction the intention is make a convincing case for the conclusion. Hempel also proposed a quantitative measure of the power of a theory to systematize its data.Later in his life, Hempel abandoned the project of an inductive logic. He also emphasized the problems with  logical positivism (logical empiricism), especially those concerning the verifiability criterion. Hempel eventually turned away from the logical positivists’ analysis of science to a more empirical analysis in terms of the sociology of science.
Hempel studied mathematics, physics, and philosophy in Gottingen, Heidelberg, Vienna, and Berlin. In Vienna, he attended some of the meetings of the Vienna Circle. With the help of Rudolf Carnap , he managed to leave Europe before the Second World War, and he came to Chicago on a research grant secured by Carnap. He later taught at the City University of New York, Yale University and Princeton University.
Table of Contents

 Life
 Scientific Explanation
 Paradoxes of Confirmation
 Concept Formation in Empirical Science
 The Late Hempel
 References and Further Reading

 1. Life
One of the leading members of logical positivism, he was born  in Oranienburg, Germany, in 1905. Between March 17  and 24, 1982, Hempel gave an interview to Richard Nolan; the text of that  interview was published for the first time in 1988 in Italian translation  (Hempel, “Autobiografia intellettuale” in Oltre il positivismo logico,  Armando: Rome, Italy, 1988). This interview is the main source of the following  biographical notes.
Hempel studied at the Realgymnasium at Berlin and, in 1923, he was admitted at the University of Gottingen where he studied mathematics  with David Hilbert and Edmund Landau and symbolic logic with Heinrich Behmann.  Hempel was very impressed with Hilbert’s program of proving the consistency of  mathematics by means of elementary methods; he also studied philosophy, but he  found mathematical logic more interesting than traditional logic. The same year  he moved to the University   of Heidelberg, where he  studied mathematics, physics, and philosophy. From 1924, Hempel studied at Berlin, where he met  Reichenbach who introduced him to the Berlin    Circle. Hempel attended Reichenbach’s courses on  mathematical logic, the philosophy of space and time, and the theory of  probability. He studied physics with Max Planck and logic with von Neumann.
In 1929, Hempel took part in the first congress on  scientific philosophy organized by logical positivists. He meet Carnap and—very  impressed by Carnap—moved to Vienna where he attended three courses with  Carnap, Schlick, and Waismann, and took part in the meetings of the Vienna  Circle. In the same years, Hempel qualified as teacher in the secondary school  and eventually, in 1934, he gained the doctorate in philosophy at Berlin, with a dissertation  on the theory of probability. In the same year, he immigrated to Belgium, with  the help of a friend of Reichenbach, Paul Oppenheim (Reichenbach introduced  Hempel to Oppenheim in 1930). Two years later, Hempel and Oppenheim published  the book Der Typusbegriff im Lichte der neuen Logik on the logical  theory of classifier, comparative and metric scientific concepts.
In 1937, Hempel was invited—with the help of Carnap—to the University of Chicago as Research Associate in  Philosophy. After another brief period in Belgium, Hempel immigrated to the United States  in 1939. He taught in New York,  at City College (1939-1940) and at Queens College  (1940-1948). In those years, he was interested in the theory of confirmation  and explanation, and published several articles on that subject: “A Purely Syntactical  Definition of Confirmation,” in The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 8, 1943;  “Studies in the Logic of Confirmation” in Mind, 54, 1945; “A Definition  of Degree of Confirmation” (with P. Oppenheim) in Philosophy of Science,  12, 1945; “A Note on the Paradoxes of Confirmation” in Mind, 55, 1946;  “Studies in the Logic of Explanation” (with P. Oppenheim) in Philosophy of Science,  15, 1948.
Between 1948 and 1955, Hempel taught at Yale University.  His work Fundamentals of Concept Formation in Empirical Science was  published in 1952 in the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science.  From 1955, he taught at the University   of Princeton. Aspects  of Scientific Explanation and Philosophy of Natural Science were  published in 1965 and 1966 respectively. After the pensionable age, he  continued teaching at Berkley,  Irvine, Jerusalem, and, from 1976  to 1985, at Pittsburgh.  In the meantime, his philosophical perspective was changing and he detached  from logical positivism: “The Meaning of Theoretical Terms: A Critique of the  Standard Empiricist Construal” in Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science IV (ed. by Patrick Suppes), 1973; “Valuation and Objectivity in Science” in Physics,  Philosophy and Psychoanalysis (ed. by R. S. Cohen and L. Laudan), 1983; “Provisoes:  A Problem Concerning the Inferential Function of Scientific Theories” in Erkenntnis,  28, 1988. However, he remained affectionately joined to logical positivism. In  1975, he undertook the editorship (with W. Stegmüller  and W. K. Essler) of the new series of the journal Erkenntnis. Hempel  died November 9, 1997,  in Princeton Township, New Jersey.
 2. Scientific Explanation
Hempel and Oppenheim’s essay “Studies in the Logic of  Explanation,” published in volume 15 of the journal Philosophy of Science,  gave an account of the deductive-nomological explanation. A scientific  explanation of a fact is a deduction of a statement (called the explanandum)  that describes the fact we want to explain; the premises (called the explanans)  are scientific laws and suitable initial conditions. For an explanation to be  acceptable, the explanans must be true.
According to the deductive-nomological model, the  explanation of a fact is thus reduced to a logical relationship between  statements: the explanandum is a consequence of the explanans.  This is a common method in the philosophy of logical positivism. Pragmatic aspects  of explanation are not taken into consideration. Another feature is that an  explanation requires scientific laws; facts are explained when they are  subsumed under laws. So the question arises about the nature of a scientific  law. According to Hempel and Oppenheim, a fundamental theory is defined as a  true statement whose quantifiers are not removable (that is, a fundamental theory  is not equivalent to a statement without quantifiers), and which do not contain  individual constants. Every generalized statement which is a logical  consequence of a fundamental theory is a derived theory. The underlying idea  for this definition is that a scientific theory deals with general properties  expressed by universal statements. References to specific space-time regions or  to individual things are not allowed. For example, Newton’s laws are true for all bodies in  every time and in every space. But there are laws (e.g., the original Kepler  laws) that are valid under limited conditions and refer to specific objects,  like the Sun and its planets. Therefore, there is a distinction between a  fundamental theory, which is universal without restrictions, and a derived  theory that can contain a reference to individual objects. Note that it is  required that theories are true; implicitly, this means that scientific laws  are not tools to make predictions, but they are genuine statements that  describe the world—a realistic point of view.
There is another intriguing characteristic of the Hempel-Oppenheim  model, which is that explanation and prediction have exactly the same logical  structure: an explanation can be used to forecast and a forecast is a valid  explanation. Finally, the deductive-nomological model accounts also for the  explanation of laws; in that case, the explanandum is a scientific law  and can be proved with the help of other scientific laws.
Aspects of Scientific Explanation, published in 1965,  faces the problem of inductive explanation, in which the explanans include statistical laws. According to Hempel, in such kind of explanation the explanans give only a high degree of probability to the explanandum, which is not  a logical consequence of the premises. The following is a very simple example.
The relative frequency of P with respect to Q is r
The object a belongs to P
————————————————–
Thus, a belongs to Q
The conclusion “a belongs to Q” is not certain,  for it is not a logical consequence of the two premises. According to Hempel,  this explanation gives a degree of probability r to the conclusion. Note  that the inductive explanation requires a covering law: the fact is explained  by means of scientific laws. But now the laws are not deterministic;  statistical laws are admissible. However, in many respects the inductive  explanation is similar to the deductive explanation.

Both deductive and inductive explanation are nomological ones (that is,      they require universal laws).
The relevant fact is the logical relation between explanans and explanandum: in deductive explanation, the latter is a logical  consequence of the former, whereas in inductive explanation, the relationship  is an inductive one. But in either model, only logical aspects are relevant;  pragmatic features are not taken in account.
The symmetry between explanation and prediction is preserved.
The explanans must be true.

 3. Paradoxes of Confirmation
During his research on confirmation, Hempel formulated the  so-called paradoxes of confirmation. Hempel’s paradoxes are a straightforward  consequence of the following apparently harmless principles:

The statement (x)(Rx → Bx) is supported by      the statement (Ra & Ba)
If P1 and P2 are logically equivalent      statements and O1 confirms P1, then O1 also supports P2.

Hence, (~Ra & ~Ba), which confirms    (x)(~Bx → ~Rx), also         supports    (x)(Rx → Bx). Now suppose         Rx means    “x is a raven” and  Bx means “x is black.”    Therefore, “a isn’t a raven and isn’t black” confirms “all ravens    are black.” That is, the observation of a red fish supports the    hypothesis that all ravens are black.
Note also that the statement    (x)((~Rx ∨ Rx) → (~Rx ∨ Bx)) is equivalent to (x)(Rx → Bx). Thus,    (~Ra ∨ Ba) supports “all ravens are black” and hence    the observation of whatever thing which is not a raven (tennis-ball,    paper, elephant, red herring) supports “all ravens are black.”
 4. Concept Formation in Empirical Science
In his monograph Fundamentals of Concept Formation in  Empirical Science (1952), Hempel describes the methods according to which  physical quantities are defined. Hempel uses the example of the measurement of  mass.
An equal-armed balance is used to determine when two  bodies have the same mass and when the mass of a body is greater than the mass  of the other. Two bodies have the same mass if, when they are on the pans, the  balance remains in equilibrium. If a pan goes down and the other up, then the  body in the lowest pan has a greater mass. From a logical point of view, this  procedure defines two relations, say E and G, so that:

 E(a,b) if and only if a and b have the      same mass;
 G(a,b) if and only if the mass of a is greater      that the mass of b.

The relations E and G satisfy the following  conditions:

 E is a reflexive, symmetric and transitive relation.
 G is an irreflexive, asymmetric and transitive relation.
 E and G are mutually exclusive—that is, if E(a,b), then not      G(a,b).
For every a and b, one and only one of the following      assertions is true:





 E(a,b)
 G(a,b)
 G(b,a)




Relations E and G thus define a partial order.
The second step consists in defining a function m which satisfies the    following three conditions:

A suitable prototype is chosen, whose mass is one kilogram.
If E(a,b) then m(a)=m(b).
There is an operation, say ©, which combines two bodies    a and b, so that
m(a © b) = m(a) + m(b)


Conditions (1)-(7) describe the measurement not only of mass  but also of length, of time and of every extensive physical quantity. (A  quantity is  extensive if there is an operation which combines the  objects according to condition 7, otherwise it is  intensive;  temperature, for  example, is intensive.)
 5. The Late Hempel
In “The Meaning of Theoretical Terms” (1973), Hempel  criticizes an aspect of logical positivism’s theory of science: the distinction  between observational and theoretical terms and the related problem about the  meaning of theoretical terms. According to Hempel, there is an implicit  assumption in neopositivist analysis of science, namely that the meaning of  theoretical terms can be explained by means of linguistic methods. Therefore,  the very problem is how can a set of statements be determined that gives a  meaning to theoretical terms. Hempel analyzes the various theories proposed by  logical positivism.
According to Schlick, the meaning of theoretical concepts is  determined by the axioms of the theory; the axioms thus play the role of  implicit definitions. Therefore, theoretical terms must be interpreted in a way  that makes the theory true. But according to such interpretation—Hempel  objects—a scientific theory is always true, for it is true by convention, and  thus every scientific theory is a priori true. This is a proof—Hempel says—that  Schlick’s interpretation of the meaning of theoretical terms is not tenable. Also  the thesis which asserts that the meaning of a theoretical term depends on the  theory in which that term is used is, according to Hempel, untenable.
Another solution to the problem of the meaning of  theoretical terms is based on the rules of correspondence (also known as  meaning postulates). They are statements in which observational and theoretical  terms occur. Theoretical terms thus gain a partial interpretation by means of  observational terms. Hempel raises two objections to this theory. First, he  asserts that observational concepts do not exist. When a scientific theory  introduces new theoretical terms, they are linked with other old theoretical  terms that usually belong to another already consolidated scientific theory.  Therefore, the interpretation of new theoretical terms is not based on  observational terms but it is given by other theoretical terms that, in a  sense, are more familiar than the new ones. The second objection is about the  conventional nature of rules of correspondence. A meaning postulate defines the  meaning of a concept and therefore, from a logical point of view, it must be  true. But every statement in a scientific theory is falsifiable, and thus there  is no scientific statement which is beyond the jurisdiction of experience. So,  a meaning postulate can be false as well; hence, it is not conventional and  thus it does not define the meaning of a concept but it is a genuine physical  hypothesis. Meaning postulates do not exist.
“Provisoes: A Problem concerning the Inferential Function of  Scientific Theories,” published in Erkenntnis (1988), criticizes another  aspect of logical positivism’s theory of science: the deductive nature of  scientific theories. It is very interesting that a philosopher who is famous  for his deductive model of scientific explanation criticized the deductive  model of science. At least this fact shows the open views of Hempel. He argues  that it is impossible to derive observational statements from a scientific  theory. For example, Newton’s  theory of gravitation cannot determine the position of planets, even if the initial  conditions are known, for Newton’s  theory deals with the gravitational force, and thus the theory cannot forecast  the influences exerted by other kinds of force. In other words, Newton’s theory requires  an explicit assumption—a provisoe, according to Hempel—which assures that the  planets are subjected only to the gravitational force. Without such hypothesis,  it is impossible to apply the theory to the study of planetary motion. But this  assumption does not belong to the theory. Therefore, the position of planets is  not determined by the theory, but it is implied by the theory plus appropriate assumptions. Accordingly, not only observational statements are not  entailed by the theory, but also there are no deductive links between  observational statements. Hence, it is impossible that an observational  statement is a logical consequence of a theory (unless the statement is  logically true). This fact has very important consequences.
One of them is that the empirical content of a theory does  not exist. Neopositivists defined it as the class of observational statements  implied by the theory; but this class is an empty set.
Another consequence is that theoretical terms are not  removable from a scientific theory. Known methods employed to accomplish this  task assert that, for every theory T, it is possible to find a theory T*  without theoretical terms so that an observational statement O is a  consequence of T* if and only if it is a consequence of T. Thus,  it is possible to eliminate theoretical terms from T without loss of  deductive power. But—Hempel argues—no observational statement O is  derivable from T, so that T* lacks empirical consequence.
Suppose T is a falsifiable theory; therefore, there is an  observational statement O so that ~O → ~T. Hence, T → ~O; so T entails an  observational statement ~O. But no observational statement is a consequence  of T. Thus, the theory T is not falsifiable. The consequence is  that every theory is not falsifiable. (Note: Hempel’s argument is evidently  wrong, for according to Popper the negation of an observational statement  usually is not an observational statement).
Finally, the interpretation of science due to  instrumentalism is not tenable. According to such interpretation, scientific  theories are rules of inference, that is, they are prescriptions according to  which observational statements are derived. Hempel’s analysis shows that these  alleged rules of inference are indeed void.
 6. References and Further Reading

Essler, W. K.,  Putnam, H., & Stegmuller, W. (Eds.). (1985). Epistemology, Methodology,  and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Carl G. Hempel on the Occasion  of his 80th Birthday, January   8th, 1985. Dordrecht,  Holland: D.  Reidel Pub. Co.
Hempel, C. G.  (1934). Beitrage zur logischen analyse des wahrscheinlichkeitsbegriffs. Universitats-buchdruckerei G. Neuenhahn, Jena.
Hempel, C. G. (1937).  “Le problème de la vérité.” Theoria, 3.
Hempel, C. G.  (1942). “The Function of General Laws in Hystory.” The Journal of Philosophy,  39.
Hempel, C. G.  (1943). “A Purely Syntactical Definition of Confirmation.” The Journal of  Symbolic Logic, 8.
Hempel, C. G.  (1945). “Studies in the Logic of Confirmation.” Mind, 54.
Hempel, C. G.  (1952). Fundamentals of Concept Formation in Empirical Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hempel, C. G.  (1958). “The Theoretician’s Dilemma.” In H. Feigl, M. Scriven & G. Maxwell  (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science (Vol. 2). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota  Press.
Hempel, C. G.  (1962). “Deductive-Nomological vs. Statistical Explanation.” In H. Feigl &  G. Maxwell (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science (Vol. 3). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota  Press.
Hempel, C. G.  (1965). Aspects of Scientific Explanation and other Essays in the Philosophy  of Science. New York:  Free Press.
Hempel, C. G.  (1966). Philosophy of Natural Science. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Hempel, C. G.  (1973). “The Meaning of Theoretical Terms: A Critique to the Standard Empiricist  Construal.” In Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Vol. IV):  North Holland Publishing Company.
Hempel, C. G.  (1981). “Turns in the Evolution of the Problem of Induction.” Synthese (46).
Hempel, C. G.  (1983). “Valutation and Objectivity in Science.” In R. S. Cohen & L. Laudan  (Eds.), Physics, Philosophy and Psychoanalysis. Dordrecth, Holland: D. Reidel Pub. Co.
Hempel, C. G.  (1985). “Thoughts on the Limitation of Discovery by Computer.” In K. F.  Schaffner (Ed.), Logic of Discovery and Diagnosis in Medicine: University of California Press.
Hempel, C. G.  (1988). “Provisoes: A Problem concerning the Inferential Function of Scientific  Theories.” Erkenntnis, 28.
Hempel, C. G.,  & Oppenheim, P. (1936). Der Typusbegriff im Lichte der neuen Logik. Leiden: A. W. Sijthoff.
Hempel, C. G.,  & Oppenheim, P. (1945). “A Definition of Degree of Confirmation.” Philosophy  of Science, 12.
Hempel, C. G.,  & Oppenheim, P. (1948). “Studies in the Logic of Explanation.” Philosophy  of Science, 15.
Rescher, N. (Ed.).  (1970). Essays in Honor of Carl G. Hempel: A Tribute on the Occasion of his  Sixty-fifth Birthday. Dordrecht,  Holland: D.  Reidel Pub. Co.
Salmon, W. C.  (1989). Four Decades of Scientific Explanation: Regents of the University of Minnesota.
Scheffler, I. (1963). The Anatomy of Inquiry. New York: Knopf.

Author Information
Mauro Murzi
Email: murzim@yahoo.com
Italy





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







