








Interventionism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Interventionism
The theory of interventionism examines the nature    and justifications of interfering with another polity (that is, political organization) or with choices made    by individuals. Interventionism is characterized by the use or threat    of force or coercion to alter a political or cultural situation    nominally outside the intervenor’s moral or political jurisdiction. It    commonly deals with a government’s interventions in other governments’    affairs–and is thus an aspect of political philosophy, but it can    also be extended to interventions in others’ cultures, religions,    lifestyles, and economic activities–and thus can fit into applied    ethics, covering such issues as paternalism, imperialism, and topics    in business, medical, and environmental ethics.
Table of Contents

 A Note on Methodological Considerations 
 What Does Interventionism Deal With? 
 Arguments for Interventionism 

 Epistemological Reasons 
 Political Realism 
 Rights Theories 


 Non-Interventionist Doctrines 
 Legal Positivism and Non-Interventionism 
 Isolationism 
 Economic Interventionism

 1. A Note on Methodological Considerations
The context of interventionism requires an    epistemological consideration. A methodological individualist will    argue that it involves interventions in the lives of individuals; that    essentially it does not matter whether the individuals are part of    one’s political entity or belonging to another–interventionism    applies solely to individuals. A methodological holist on the other    hand will identify the object of interventionism as groups–cultural,    political, religious, national, and so on. Whilst the methodological    individualist will focus on issues that infringe or attempt to alter    individuals’ rights or choices, the holist will draw attention to    issues affecting groups and their identities. Methodological    compatibilism holds that interventions do affect individual rights or    choices but individuals also identify themselves with groups who can    also be separately affected by interference. For example, demanding    that all female bank employees wear blue dresses affects the    individual’s choice of clothes in the workplace but also interferes    with the banking corporation’s right to determine its own standard of    dress.
 2. What Does Interventionism Deal With?
Beyond epistemological considerations    interventionism commonly deals with the justifications of governments    to interfere in (a) the lives of its own civilian population–domestic    interventions, and (b) the activities of other nations–foreign    interventions. In the case of domestic interventionism that apparatus    is the police force (or the army acting as a domestic policing force    as with the British army in Northern Ireland 1969-date); in the case    of international interventionism it is the army. In either scenario    interventionism implies the potential or actual use of coercion.
Reasoning or persuading another group of people    that a chosen policy, or a certain tradition, is wrong either morally    (given a certain standard) or on consequentialist considerations (the    policy will not achieve what it’s meant to achieve) are not examples    of interventionism. Reasoning includes all forms of rhetoric, example,    persuasion, exhortation, counseling, discourse, and so on. The other    group changes policy or tradition only if it desires –is persuaded–    to change. They do so voluntarily. On the other hand, it may be    claimed that in attempting to persuade others to change their minds is    a form of interventionism. But this definition then becomes too broad    to be of use–merely speaking to another or judging their behavior in    the absence of any threats, coercion, or force, cannot be termed    interventionist, for its goal is not to interfere but to explain    possible choices.
Breaking diplomatic relations    also does not imply the use of force and hence is not a form of    interventionism. This is an essentially peaceful attempt to alter    another government’s actions in effect by removing acknowledgement of    its international political status.
Voluntary    decisions on the part of a people may change a nation’s values.    Trading in goods and ideas can change a society, yet such changes    should not, for the most part, be deemed interventionist. Changes in    culture and language that result from the voluntary decisions of many    individuals cannot be tied to any form of interventionism, for the    policy of interventionism is a policy of threatening or using coercion    or force of some description. Whether such examples exist is hard to    ascertain, for commonly the expansion of freedom of trade that has led    to an exchange of ideas and hence of cultures is historically almost    universally connected with imperialist policies that do aim at    explicit forms of intervention. Following World War Two (1939-45) when    Western imperialism dwindled as a political value, it can be argued    that various societies (e.g., Taiwan, Malaysia) voluntarily took up    what are referred to as ‘Western values’ through the influence of    non-violent commercial ventures. However, critics may point out that    previous military interventions could be considered as necessary    precursors to changes in the culture of the people.
Coercion is a form of interventionism. Coercion    implies offering choices that normally would not be accepted, but    which leave the individual to choose the option preferred by the    coercer, or by default one that is less acceptable. For example: if a    knife is held to your throat and you are given the option to hand over    your car keys or die, you are being coerced; if a government demands    that you open up your borders to a free trade in opium or face armed    conflict (China, Opium Wars with Britain) your nation is being    coerced.
Domestic interventions entail    restricting the choices of individuals or groups or altering their    activities through legislative coercion. Limiting freedom of speech or    trade, restricting occupational access to certain religious groups, or    enforcing the draft are examples of interventions in the choices of    individuals or groups, while increasing beer taxes are examples of    altering choices through legislative frameworks; failure to comply may    incur penalties.
On the international level,    interventionist activities involve threatening, coercing, or forcing    another group or nation to alter its behavior or change its government    or policies. International interventionism can incorporate direct    activities such as the use or threat of war, as well as indirect    activities such as assassination, subversion, and economic embargoes    of all descriptions (complete or partial blockades, transport    restrictions, etc.).
General goals of    international interventionism include attempting to change:    governments (e.g., Iran, 1979); people’s expectations of governmental    activities; general attitudes of just conduct not held as appropriate    in the wider international community (e.g., South African Apartheid).    Specific goals can include changing a state apparatus or its personnel    (the government), to remove a particular statesperson or group, to    change specific or general policies, to alter cultural or political    beliefs, or even to alter patterns of economic and population    distributions.
 3. Arguments for Interventionism
Utilitarian or    consequentialist prescriptions are open-ended: they could support    interventions either generally or in particular circumstances,    depending on expected results. Other positions offer more principled    cases for interventionism, for example on epistemological grounds,    political realism or rights analyses.
 a. Epistemological Reasons
Intervening can be justified on grounds of the    government possessing better knowledge than individual agents, or from    paternalistic reasons, which presume the target agents are incapable    of making informed choices themselves. To that extent, governments may    legislate a range of programs from ensuring that people take out    adequate insurance or invest sufficiently into pensions to requiring    health checks or continued education; or economic interventions could    be justified on the grounds that economic agents (investors,    corporations, banks) do not act in the long term interest of the    nation, whereas civil servants who are deemed above the profit motive    can take the longer view (as held by John Maynard Keynes 1883-1946,    for example).
 b. Political Realism
Political realism is defined by the primacy of    national interest in international affairs. This can be viewed as    either a moral duty or as a description of the ruling state of    affairs. Policy prescriptions involve pursuing interventions as they    benefit the national interest. The theory implies that states should    be left alone to seek and to defend their own interests. In the    realist tradition, of which there are many shades, such supporters    include Thucydides, Machiavelli, and Hobbes.
Political realism offers a broad interventionist    doctrine that can justify intervening for reasons of economic profit    as well as for balance of power considerations. The history of the    British Empire provides many examples of both justifications (Cf. its    interventions in European politics in the War of the Spanish    Succession 1702-13 and the War of the Austrian Succession 1740-8),    whilst post-war US foreign policy offers more recent case studies    (Vietnam War 1961-73 and the Gulf War 1990-91). It is captured by    Thucydides’ description of the Pelopennesian War, that it was Spartan    “fear of Athenian growth” that caused the war. Realists often invoke    consequentialist concerns regarding the developing international state    of affairs–that should the foreign power to grow unchecked, a war    would ensue, or economic resource bases would be lost, or an invasion    could occur. The Schlieffen Plan, prior to the First World War    (1914-18) is another useful example of balance of power    considerations.
Political realism assumes that    interests are to be maintained through the exercise of power, and that    the world is characterized by competing power bases (nation states    [Hegel], for example, or classes [Marx]). Political realism is essence    reduces to the ethical principle that might is right.
 c. Rights Theories
Some claim    that rights only pertain to individuals, and that nations and    governments only acquire any rights or privileges by virtue of the    civilians giving them power. Rights theorists thus argue that    individual rights supersede or ‘trump’ the rights or privileges of    governments. On this basis, interventions in support of rights are    morally justifiable. For example, if a foreign government tyrannizes    its civilians, an intervention to support their rights can be    justified, for the moral status of rights does not end at political    borders. However, what needs to be considered is at what point do    rights violations justify an intervention, or would an intervention do    more harm than good? Second is the argument from hypocrisy–can a    nation be justified in intervening in another’s affairs when it does    not have a clean slate of its own? Finally, given that rights are    being violated, is a government guilty of moral failure if it fails to    intervene, and if so, is that moral failure a failure of its duty or    of virtuous behavior?
 4. Non-Interventionist Doctrines
Non-interventionism is the theory    that one does not have any moral justification in intervening in    others’ affairs. On a rights based analysis, or from Kantian    considerations of duty, this may be considered an absolutist    prohibition on the grounds that it either violates others’ rights to    freedom or respect due them as individual moral entities.    Consequentialists may infer from evidence that interventionism is    always counter-productive and should not be practiced. In contemporary    ethical analysis, a rule utilitarian may claim that since    interventions never work (an empirical, testable hypothesis), ethical    considerations aimed at maximizing the greatest good for the greatest    number should employ non-interventionism on principle. However, act    utilitarians may agree that historically interventions have not    worked, but that does not mean that they will not in a future    situation, and hence non-interventionism should not be held    categorically.
As a political-economical    doctrine, non-interventionism includes the economic doctrine of    laissez-faire, which holds that governments should not    intervene in the economic activities of individuals or corporations.    Some thinkers, notably Herbert Spencer (1820-1903) have extended the    doctrine to moral issues too, arguing, for example, that intervening    in the plight of the poor only makes their condition worse by creating    an atmosphere of dependency, rather than leaving them to independently    struggle and find their own values. Other supporters of the economic    laissez-faire doctrine do not go as far as Spencer; Friedrich    von Hayek argues (Constitution of Liberty, 1956) that    governments do have responsibilities to the poor resulting from their    duty to provide a general framework to ensure the smooth operation of    the free market system.
On a broader view,    non-interventionism is applied by John Stuart Mill in On    Liberty; he claims that responsibility to others only goes so far    as ensuring they know of the dangers that may befall them, but does    not extend to actually physically restraining those who would    knowingly injure themselves. In the international sphere, Mill (“Notes    on Intervention” Collected Works) argues for a policy of    self-determination: that other people be allowed to make their own    mistakes, and hence forge their own paths to freedom; intervening    paternalistically on their behalf will not be conducive to their    learning the value of freedom in its own right. Such a stance can be    used in a variety of issues including freedom of press and expression.    For example, John Milton in Areopagitica argues: “And though    all the winds of doctrine were let loose to play on the earth, so    Truth be in the field, we do injuriously by licensing and prohibiting    to misdoubt her strength. Let her and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew    Truth put to the worse in a free and open encounter?”
 5. Legal Positivism and Non-Interventionism
In the international sphere, legal positivists are    commonly non-interventionists. Legal positivists, following Christian    Wolff (1679-1754), argue that nation states possess absolute rights to    political sovereignty and territorial integrity, which implies that    national borders be inviolable. Wolff writes: “Nations are regarded as    individual free persons living in a state of nature. For they consist    of a multitude of men united into a state. Therefore since states are    regarded as individual free persons living in a state of nature,    nations must also be regarded in relation to each other as individual    free persons living in a state of nature.” (Jus Gentium Methodo    Scientifica Pertractatum Trans. Joseph Drake. Clarendon Press:    Oxford, 1934, §2, p.9) The positivist theory of international    relations implies that interventions would violate international    borders; this position itself resolves into an absolutist doctrine    that deems interventions should never be condoned and more pragmatic    positions that permit some exceptions to the rule.
Positivist exceptions to non-interventionism emanate    from humanitarian considerations that overwhelm nominally sacrosanct    national borders, if the target state is violating basic human rights    to such an extent that it can no longer be deemed a proper    representative of its people. The type of interventionism supported    depends on the theory of the state entertained.
If governments are viewed as instrumental institutions    that exist to uphold the domestic rights of civilians, then a    violation of its remit can warrant an intervention on behalf of the    citizens. Michael Walzer in Just and Unjust Wars (1977)    entertains this position, arguing that only in extreme cases of rights    violations “that shock the moral conscience of mankind” (p.107), can    interventions be supported. He gives the examples of genocide, mass    murder or enslavement. Rights violations above this level, he implies,    are not grounds for interventionism (e.g., removal of free movement,    freedom of the press, etc).
A Hobbesian case    for interventionism can be maintained by those who consider    governments the sole and proper moral and legal authorities. Hobbes    claims that individuals give up the rights that they possess in the    state of nature (except the right of self-preservation) to the state    (the ‘Leviathan’). He argues the State should be obeyed, even it is    acting quite tyrannically, for the alternative –and the greater    evil– is the state of war in which justice and morality do not hold.    However, if a state acts to takes its civilians into the state of    nature by governing incompetently or unjustly then the people have a    right to form a new state. This allows the legal positivist to condone    interventions where governments have obviously failed in their    obligations and have brought war to the people through their    ineptitude.
The third possible justification    for the positivist is when a supra-legal body legislates in favor of    an intervention. For example, the United Nations has the jurisdiction    to pass a resolution of intervention, but it does not condone    unilateral interventions. Positivists draw parallels here between    governments arbitrating in domestic disputes and a world body acting    to dissolve international disputes.
 6. Isolationism
Isolationism    is the political doctrine of non-involvement in foreign affairs. The    state, it is argued, should confine its activities to its own    jurisdiction, and therefore, what happens abroad is of no concern.    Isolationism can be argued from a consequentialist perspective: that    getting involved would only make matters (whatever those matters are)    worse; or from an intrinsicist perspective similar to the legal    positivist case, that national jurisdiction (and hence moral and    political concerns) ends at the political borders.
 7. Economic Interventionism
Government intervention in    the economy was noted above. Whilst the effects and the principles are    the subject matter of economics, philosophers can fruitfully examine    the nature of the epistemological arguments used in the debates which    involve considerations of methodological individualism versus holism,    and a-priori versus a-posteriori reasoning.
Author Information
Alexander Moseley
Email: alexandermoseley@icloud.com
United Kingdom





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







