








Ricoeur, Paul | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Paul Ricoeur (1913—2005)
Paul  Ricoeur was among the most impressive philosophers of the 20th  century continental philosophers, both in the unusual breadth and depth of his philosophical  scholarship and in the innovative nature of his thought. He was a  prolific writer, and his work is essentially concerned with that grand  theme of philosophy: the meaning of life.  Ricoeur’s “tensive” style focuses on the tensions running through the very structure of human being. His constant  preoccupation was with a hermeneutic of the self, fundamental to which  is the need we have for our lives to be made intelligible to us.  Ricoeur’s flagship in this endeavor is his narrative theory. Though a Christian philosopher whose work in theology is well-known and  respected, his philosophical writings do not rely upon  theological concepts, and are appreciated by non-Christians and  Christians alike. His most widely read works are The Rule of Metaphor, From  Text to Action, and Oneself As Another, and the  three volumes of Time and Narrative. His other significant  books include Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences, Conflict of  Interpretations, The Symbolism of Evil, Freud and Philosophy, and  Freedom and Nature: The Voluntary and the  Involuntary.
Table of Contents

 Life and Works 
 Style 
 Influences 
 The Philosophy 
 Time and Narrative 
 Ethics 
 References and Further Reading 

 Selected Ricoeur Bibliography 
 Further Reading



 1. Life and Works
Jean Paul Gustave Ricoeur was born on  February 27, 1913, at Valence, France, and he died in Chatenay-Malabry, France   on May 20, 2005. He lost both his parents  within his first few years of his life and was raised with his sister  Alice by his paternal grandparents, both of whom were devout  Protestants.  Ricoeur was a bookish child and successful student. He  was awarded a scholarship to study at the Sorbonne in 1934, and  afterwards was appointed to his first teaching position at Colmar,  Alsace. While at the Sorbonne he first met Gabriel Marcel, who was to  become a lifelong friend and philosophical influence. In 1935 he was  married to Simone Lejas, with whom he has raised five children.
Ricoeur served in World War II – spending most of it as a  prisoner of war – and was awarded the Croix de Guerre. He was  interred with Mikel Dufrenne, with whom he later wrote a book on the  work of Karl Jaspers. After the war Ricoeur returned to teaching,  taking positions at the University of Strasbourg, the Sorbonne,  University of Paris at Nanterre, the University of Louvain and  University of Chicago.    Ricoeur is a traditional philosopher in the sense that his work is  highly systematic and steeped in the classics  of Western philosophy.  His is a reflective philosophy, that is, one that considers the most  fundamental philosophical problems to concern self-understanding.  While Ricoeur retains subjectivity at the heart of philosophy, his is  no abstract Cartesian-style subject; the subject is always a situated  subject, an embodied being anchored in a named and dated physical,  historical and social world. For this reason his work is sometimes  described as philosophical anthropology.    Ricoeur is a post-structuralist hermeneutic philosopher who employs  a model of textuality as the framework for his analysis of meaning,  which extends across writing, speech, art and action. Ricoeur  considers human understanding to be cogent only to the extent that it  implicitly deploys structures and strategies characteristic of  textuality. It is Ricoeur’s view that  our self-understandings, and  indeed history itself , are “fictive”, that is, subject to the  productive effects of the imagination through interpretation.  For  Ricoeur, the human subjectivity is primarily linguistically  designated and mediated by symbols. He states that the “problematic  of existence” is given in language and must be worked out in language  and discourse.  Ricoeur refers to his hermeneutic method as a  “hermeneutics of suspicion” because discourse both reveals and  conceals something about the nature of being. Unlike  post-structuralists such as Foucault and Derrida, for whom  subjectivity is nothing more than an effect of language, Ricoeur  anchors subjectivity in the human body and the material world, of  which language is a kind of second order articulation. In the face of  the fragmentation and alienation of post-modernity, Ricoeur offers  his narrative theory as the path to a unified and meaningful life;  indeed, to the good life.
 2. Style
Ricoeur has developed a  theoretical style that can best be described as “tensive”. He weaves  together heterogeneous concepts and discourses to form a composite  discourse in which new meanings are created without diminishing the  specificity and difference of the constitutive terms. Ricoeur’s work  on metaphor and on the human experience of time are perhaps the best  examples of this method, although his entire philosophy is explicitly  such a discourse.  For example, in What Makes Us Think? Ricoeur discusses the nature of mental life in terms of the tension  between our neurobiological conceptions of mind and our  phenomenological concepts. Similarly, in the essay “Explanation and  Understanding” he discusses human behavior in terms of the tension  between concepts of material causation, and the language of actions  and motives. The tensive style is in keeping with  what Ricoeur  regards as basic, ontological tensions inherent in the peculiar  being that is human existence, namely, the ambiguity of belonging to  both the natural world and the world of action (through freedom of  the will).  Accordingly, Ricoeur insists that philosophy find a way  to contain and express those tensions, and so his work ranges across  diverse schools of philosophical thought, bringing together insights  and analysis from both the Anglo-American and European traditions, as  well as from literary studies, political science and history.
The tensions are played out in our ability to take different  perspectives on ourselves and so to formulate diverse approaches and  methods in understanding ourselves.  The different theoretical  frameworks employed in philosophy and the sciences are not simply the  result of ignorance or power. They are the result of tensions that  run through the very structure of human being; tensions which Ricoeur  describes as “fault lines.” Ricoeur’s entire body of work is an  attempt to identify and map out the intersections of these numerous  and irreducible lines that comprise our understandings of the human  world. Ricoeur calls these “fault lines” because they are lines that  can intersect in different ways in all the different aspects of human  lives, giving lives different meanings. However, as points of  intersection of discourses, these meanings can come apart. Ricoeur  argues that the stability we enjoy with respect to the meanings of  our lives is a tentative stability, subject to the influences of the  material world, including the powers and afflictions of one’s body,  the actions of other people and institutions, and one’s own emotional  and cognitive states. Given the fundamental nature of these tensions,  Ricoeur argues that it is ultimately poetics (exemplified in  narrative), rather than philosophy that provides the structures and  synthetic strategies by which understanding and a coherent sense of  self and life is possible.
 3. Influences
Ricoeur acknowledges  his indebtedness to several key figures in the tradition, most  notably, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel and Heidegger. Aristotelian teleology  pervades Ricoeur’s textual hermeneutics, and is most obvious in his  adoption of a narrative approach. The concepts of “muthos” and  “mimesis” in Aristotle’s Poetics form the basis for Ricoeur’s  account of narrative “emplotment,” which he enjoins with the innovative  powers of the Kantian productive imagination within a general theory  of poetics.
The influence of Hegel is manifest in Ricoeur’s employment of a  method he describes as a  “refined dialectic.” For Ricoeur, the  dialectic is a “relative moment[s] in a complex process called  interpretation” (Explanation and Understanding”, 150). Like Hegel,  the dialectic involves identifying key oppositional terms in a  debate, and then proceeding to articulate their synthesis into a new,  more developed concept. However, this synthesis does not have the  uniformity of a Hegelian synthesis.  Ricoeur’s method entails showing  how the meanings of two seemingly opposed terms are implicitly  informed by, and borrow from, each other. Within the dialectic, the  terms maintain their differences at the same time that a common  “ground” is formed. However, the common ground is simply the ground  of their mutual presupposition. Ricoeur’s dialectic, then, is a unity  of continuity and discontinuity. For example, in “Explanation and  Understanding” Ricoeur argues that scientific explanation implicitly  deploys a background hermeneutic understanding that exceeds the  resources of explanation. At the same time, hermeneutic understanding  necessarily relies upon the systematic process of explanation.  Neither the natural sciences nor the human sciences are fully  autonomous disciplines. A key dialectic that runs through Ricoeur’s  entire corpus is the dialectic of same and other. This is a  foundational dialectic for him, and so, as might be expected, it  structures his discussions and dissections of every field of  philosophy he enters: selfhood, justice, love, morality, personal  identity, knowledge, time, language, metaphor, action, aesthetics,  metaphysics, and so on.    Unlike the Hegelian dialectic, for Ricoeur, there is no absolute  culminating point. There is, nevertheless, a kind of absolute, an  objective existence that is revealed indirectly through the  dialectic. This is most evident in the third volume of Time and  Narrative, where he argues that phenomenological time presupposes  an objective order of time (cosmological time), and in The Rule of  Metaphor, where he argues that language belongs to, and is  expressive of, extra-linguistic reality. Despite this apparent  concession to realism, Ricoeur insists that the objective cannot be  known as such, but  merely grasped indirectly and analytically. Here,  the Kantian influence comes to the fore. For Ricoeur, objective  reality is the contemporary equivalent of Kantian noumena: although  it can never itself become an object of knowledge, it is a kind of  necessary thought, a limiting concept, implied in objects of  knowledge.    This view informs Ricoeur’s “tensive” style. Although we can know,  philosophically that there is an objective reality, and, in that  sense, a metaphysical constraint on human existence, we can never  understand human existence simply in terms of this objectivity. What  we must appeal to in order to understand our existence are our  substantive philosophical and ethical concepts and norms. This sets  up an inevitable tension between the contingency of those norms and  the brute fact of objective reality, evidenced in our experience of  the involuntary, for example, as aging and dying. Again, Kant looms  large. We necessarily regard ourselves from two perspectives: as the  author of our actions in the practical world, and as part of, or  passive to, cause and effect in the natural world. Such is the  inherently ambiguous and tensive nature of human, mortal subjects. It  is this condition, then, with which philosophy must grapple. And it  is to this condition that Ricoeur offers narrative as the appropriate  framework.
 4. The Philosophy
There are two closely related  questions that animate all of Ricoeur’s work, and which he considers  to be fundamental to philosophy: “Who am I?” and “How should I live?”  The first question has been neglected by much of contemporary  analytical and post-modern philosophy. Consequently, those  philosophies lack the means to address the second question.  Postmodernism self-consciously rejects traditional processes of  identity formation, depicting them as familial and political power  relations premised upon dubious metaphysical assumptions about  gender, race and mind. At the same time, contemporary philosophy of  mind reduces questions of “who?” to questions of “what?”, and in  doing so, closes down considerations of self while rendering the  moral question one of mere instrumentality or utility. In relation to  the question “Who am I?”, Ricoeur acknowledges a long-standing debt  to Marcel and Heidegger, and to a lesser extent to Merleau-Ponty. To  the moral question, the debt is to Aristotle and Kant. In addressing  the question “who am I?” Ricoeur sets out first to understand the  nature of selfhood – to understand the being whose nature it is to  enquire into itself.
In this endeavor, Ricoeur’s philosophy is driven by the desire to  provide an account that will do justice to the tensions and  ambiguities which make us human, and which underpin our fallibility.  Ricoeur’s interest here can be noted as early as The Voluntary and  The Involuntary, drafted during his years as a prisoner of war.  There he explores the involuntary constraints to which we are  necessarily subject in virtue of our being bodily mortal creatures,  and the voluntariness necessary to the idea of ourselves as the  agents of our actions. We have, as he later describes it, a “double  allegiance”, an allegiance to the material world of cause and effect,  and to the phenomenal world of the freedom of the will by which we  tear  ourselves away from the laws of nature through action. This  conception of the double nature of the self lies at the core of  Ricoeur’s philosophy.    Ricoeur rejects the idea that a self is a metaphysical entity; there  is no entity, “the self,” there is only selfhood. Selfhood is an  intersubjectively constituted capacity for agency and self-ascription  that can be had by individual human beings. Selfhood proper is  neither simply an abstract nor an animal self-awareness, but both. It  essentially involves an active grasp of oneself as a “who”–that is,  as a person who is the subject of a concrete situation, a situation  characterized by material and phenomenal qualities. This entails  understanding oneself as a named person with a time and place of  birth, linked to other similarly named persons and to certain ethnic  and cultural traditions, living in a dated and named place. In  Oneself As Another Ricoeur describes how the complexity of the  question of “who?” opens directly onto a certain way of articulating  the question of personal identity:  “how the self can be at one and the same time a person of whom we  speak and a subject who designates herself in the first person while  addressing a second person. . . The difficulty will be . . .  understanding how the third person is designated in discourse as  someone who designates himself as a first person (34-5)”.    Drawing on Heidegger’s notion of Dasein, Ricoeur goes on to write  that “To say self is not to say myself . . . the passage from  selfhood to mineness is marked by the clause “in each case” . . . The  self . .  . is in each case mine” (OAA 180). What he means by this is  that each person has to take one’s selfhood as one’s own; each must  take oneself as who one is; one must “attest” to oneself.  Subjectivity, or selfhood, is for Ricoeur, a dialectic of activity  and passivity because we are beings with a “double nature,”  structured along the fault lines of the voluntary and the  involuntary, beings given to ourselves as something to be known.    Ricoeur shares Marcel’s view that the answer to the question “Who am  I?” can never be fully explicated. This is because, in asking “Who am  I?”, “I” who pose the question necessarily fall within the domain of  enquiry; I am both seeker and what is sought. This peculiar  circularity gives a “questing” and dialectical character to selfhood,  which now requires a hermeneutic approach. This circularity has its  origins in the nature of embodied subjectivity.    Ricoeur’s account is built upon Marcel’s conception of embodied  subjectivity as a “fundamental predicament”(Marcel, 1965). The  predicament lies in the anti-dualist realization that “I” and my body  are not metaphysically distinct entities. My body cannot be  abstracted from its being mine. Whatever states I may attribute to my  body as its states, I do so only insofar as they are attributes of  mine. My body is both something that I am and something that I  have: it is “my body” that imagines, perceives and  experiences. The unity of “my body” is a unity sui generis.  Yet my body is also that over which I exercise a certain  instrumentality through my agency. However, the agency that effects  that instrumentality is nothing other than “my body.” There is no  I-body relation; the primitive term here is “my body.”    The inherent ambiguity of the “carnate body” or “corps-sujet”  can be directly experienced by clasping one’s own hands (an example  often employed by Marcel and Merleau-Ponty). In this experience the  distinction between subject and object becomes blurred: it isn’t  clear which hand is being touched and which is touching; each hand  oscillates between the role of agent and object, without ever being  both simultaneously. One cannot feel oneself feeling. This example is  supposed to demonstrate two points: first, that the ambiguity of my  body prevents the complete objectification of myself, and second,  that ambiguity extends to all perception. Perception is not simply  passive, but rather, involves an active reception (a concept  that Ricoeur takes up and develops in his account of the ontology of  the self and one’s own body in Oneself As Another, see  319–329). In other words, my body has an active role in structuring  my perceptions, and so, the meaning of my perceptions needs to be  interpreted in the context of my bodily situation.    The non-coincidence of myself and my body constitutes a “fault line”  within the structure of subjectivity. The result is that knowledge  of myself and the world is not constituted by more or less accurate  facts, but rather, is a composite discourse–a discourse which charts  the intersection of the objective, intersubjective and subjective  aspects of lived experience. On this view, all knowledge, including  my knowledge of my own existence, is mediate and so calls for  interpretation. This also means that self-understanding can never be  grasped by the kind of introspective immediacy celebrated by  Descartes. Instead, as human beings we are never quite “at one” with  ourselves; we are fallible creatures. Thus, who I am is not an  objective fact to be discovered, but rather something that I must  achieve or create, and to which I must attest.    On Ricoeur’s view, the question “Who am I ?” is a question specific  to a certain kind of being, namely, being a subject of a temporal,  material, linguistic and social unity. The ability to grasp oneself  as a concrete subject of such a world requires a complex mode of  understanding capable of integrating discourses of quite heterogenous  kinds, including, importantly, different orders of time. It is to the  temporal dimension of selfhood that Ricoeur has most directly  addressed his hermeneutic philosophy and narrative model of  understanding.
 5. Time and Narrative
Central to Ricoeur’s defense of  narrative is its capacity to represent the human experience of time.  Such a capacity is an essential requisite for a reflective  philosophy. Ricoeur sets out his account of “human time” in Time  and Narrative, Volume 3. He points out that we experience time in  two different ways. We experience time as linear succession, we  experience the passing hours and days and the progression of our  lives from birth to death. This is cosmological time–time expressed  in the metaphor of the “river” of time. The other is phenomenological  time; time experienced in terms of the past, present and future. As  self-aware embodied beings, we not only experience time as linear  succession, but we are also oriented to the succession of time in  terms of what has been, what is, and what will be. Ricoeur’s concept  of “human time” is expressive of a complex experience in which  phenomenological time and cosmological time are integrated. For  example, we understand the full meaning of “yesterday” or “today” by  reference to their order in a succession of dated time. To say “Today  is my birthday” is to immediately invoke  both orders of time: a  chronological date to which is anchored the phenomenological concept  of “birthday.” Ricoeur describes this anchoring as the “inscription”  of phenomenological time on cosmological time (TN3 109).
These two conceptions of time have traditionally been seen in  opposition, but Ricoeur argues that they share a relation of mutual  presupposition. The order of “past-present-future” within  phenomenological time presupposes the succession characteristic of  cosmological time. The past is always before the present which is  always after the past and before the future. The order of succession  is invariable, and this order is not part of the concepts of past,  present or future considered merely as existential orientations. On  the other hand, within cosmological time, the identification of  supposedly anonymous instants of time as “before” or “after” within  the succession borrows from the phenomenological orientation to past  and future. Ricoeur argues that any philosophical model for  understanding human existence must employ a composite temporal  framework. The only suitable candidate here is the narrative  model.    Ricoeur links narrative’s temporal complexity to Aristotle’s  characterization of narrative as “the imitation of an action”.  Ricoeur’s account of the way in which narrative represents the human  world of acting (and, in its passive mode, suffering) turns on three  stages of interpretation that he calls mimesis1 (prefiguration of the  field of action), mimesis2 (configuration of the field of action),  and mimesis3  (refiguration of the field of action). Mimesis1  describes the way in which the field of human acting is always  already prefigured with certain basic competencies, for example,  competency in the conceptual network of the semantics of action  (expressed in the ability to raise questions of who, how,  why, with whom, against whom, etc.); in the use of symbols  (being able to grasp one thing as standing for something else); and  competency in the temporal structures governing the syntagmatic order  of narration (the “followability” of a narrative).    Mimesis2 concerns the imaginative configuration of the elements  given in the field of action at the level of mimesis1. Mimesis2  concerns narrative “emplotment.” Ricoeur describes this level as “the  kingdom of the as if” Narrative emplotment brings the diverse  elements of a situation into an imaginative order, in just the same  way as does the plot of a story. Emplotment here has a mediating  function. It configures events, agents and objects and renders those  individual elements meaningful as part of a larger whole in which  each takes a place in the network that constitutes the narrative’s  response to why, how, who, where, when, etc.  By  bringing together heterogeneous factors into its syntactical order  emplotment creates a “concordant discordance,” a tensive unity which  functions as a redescription of a situation in which the internal  coherence of the constitutive elements endows them with an  explanatory role.    A particularly useful feature of narrative which becomes apparent at  the level mimesis2 is the way in which the linear chronology of  emplotment is able to represent different experiences of time. What  is depicted as the “past” and the “present” within the plot does not  necessarily correspond to the “before” and “after” of its linear,  episodic structure.  For example, a narrative may begin with a  culminating event, or it may devote long passages to events depicted  as occurring within relatively short periods of time. Dates and times  can be disconnected from their denotative function; grammatical  tenses can be changed, and changes in the tempo and duration of  scenes create a temporality that is “lived” in the story that does  not coincide with either the time of the world in which the story is  read, nor the time that the unfolding events are said to depict. In  Volume 2 of Time and Narrative, Ricoeur’s analyses of Mrs.  Dalloway, The Magic Mountain and Remembrance of Things  Past centre on the diverse variations of time produced by the  interplay of a three tiered structure of time: the time of narrating;  the narrated time; and the fictive experience of time produced  through “the conjunction/disjunction of the time it takes to narrate  and narrated time” (TN2 77). Narrative configuration has at hand a  rich array of strategies for temporal signification.    Another key feature of mimesis2 is the ability of the internal logic  of the narrative unity (created by emplotment) to endow the  connections between the elements of the narrative with necessity. In  this way, emplotment forges a causal continuity from a temporal  succession, and so creates the intelligibility and credibility of the  narrative. Ricoeur argues that the temporal order of the events  depicted in the narrative is simultaneous with the construction of  the necessity that connects those elements into a conceptual unity:  from the structure of one thing after another arises the conceptual  relation of one thing because of another. It is this conversion that  so well “imitates” the continuity demanded by a life, and makes it  the ideal model for personal identity and self-understanding.    Mimesis3 concerns the integration of the imaginative or “fictive”  perspective offered at the level of mimesis2 into actual, lived  experience. Ricoeur’s model for this is a phenomenology of reading,  which he describes as “the intersection of the world of the text and  the world of the reader”(TN1 71). Not only are our life stories  “written,” they must be “read,” and when they are read they are taken  as one’s own and integrated into one’s identity and  self-understanding. Mimesis3 effects the integration of the  hypothetical to the real by anchoring the time depicted (or  recollected or imputed) in a dated “now” and “then” of actual, lived  time.    Mimesis is a cyclical interpretative process because it is inserted  into the passage of cosmological time. As time passes, our  circumstances give rise to new experiences and new opportunities for  reflection. We can redescribe our past experiences, bringing to light  unrealized connections between agents, actors, circumstances, motives  or objects, by drawing connections between the events retold and  events that have occurred since, or by bringing to light untold  details of past events. Of course, narrative need not have a happy  ending. The concern of narrative is coherence and structure, not the  creation of a particular kind of experience.  Nevertheless, the  possibility of redescription of the past offers us the possibility of  re-imagining and reconstructing a future inspired by hope. It is this  potentially inexhaustible process that is the fuel for philosophy and  literature.
 6. Ethics
Besides the metaphysical  complexity and heterogeneity of the human situation, one of Ricoeur’s  deepest concerns is the tentative, even fragile status of the  coherence of a life.  His conception of ethics is directly tied to  his conception of the narrative self. Because selfhood is something  that must be achieved and something dependent upon the regard, words  and actions of others, as well as chancy material conditions, one can  fail to achieve selfhood, or one’s sense of who one is can fall  apart. The narrative coherence of one’s life can be lost, and with  that loss comes the inability to regard oneself as the worthy subject  of a good life; in other words, the loss of self-esteem.
Ricoeur’s ethics is teleological. He argues that human life has an  ethical aim, and that aim is self-esteem: “the interpretation of  ourselves mediated by the ethical evaluation of our actions.  Self-esteem is itself an evaluation process indirectly applied to  ourselves as selves” (The Narrative Path, 99). In short,  self-esteem means being able to attest to oneself as being the worthy  subject of a good life, where “good” is an evaluation informed not  simply by one’s own subjective criteria, but rather by  intersubjective criteria to which one attests. This entails another  moral concept: that of imputation. As the subject of my actions, I am  responsible for what I do; I am the subject to whom my actions can be  imputed and whose character is to be interpreted in the light of  those actions. Ricoeur describes the ethical perspective that arises  from this view of the subject as “aiming at the good life” with and  for others, in just institutions” (OAA 172). Such a perspective  merely spells out the premise of this practical and material  conception of selfhood, with its presupposition of the world of  action, lived with others. For Ricoeur, a life can have an aim  because the teleological structure of action extends over a whole  life, understood within the narrative framework. The ethical life is  achieved by aiming to live well with others in just institutions.    Ricoeur’s view of selfhood has it that we are utterly reliant upon  each other. While Ricoeur emphasizes the importance of the first  person perspective and the notion of personal responsibility, his is  no philosophy of the radical individual. He emphasizes that we are  “mutually vulnerable”, and so the fate (self-esteem) of each of us  is tied up with the fate of others. This situation has a normative  dimension: we have an indebtedness to each other, a duty to care for  each other and to engender self-respect and justice, all of which are  necessary to the creation and preservation of self-esteem.    While duty runs deep, Ricoeur argues that it is nevertheless  preceded by a certain reciprocity. In order to feel commanded by  duty, one must first have the capacity to hear and respond to the  demand of the Other. That is, there must be some fundamental,  primordial openness and orientation to others for the power of duty  to be felt. Prior to duty there must be a basic reciprocity, which  underlies our mutual vulnerability and from which duty, as well as  the possibility of friendship and justice, arises. Here, Ricoeur  emphasizes the ethical primacy of acting and suffering.    Ricoeur calls this phenomenon “solicitude” or “benevolent  spontaneity” (OAA 190). It makes the relation of self and Other (and  thus, ethics) primordial, or ontological – hence the title of  Ricoeur’s book on ethics, Oneself As Another. Self-esteem is  said to arise from a primitive reciprocity of spontaneous, benevolent  feelings, feelings which one is also capable of directing toward  oneself, but only through the benevolence of others. This fundamental  reciprocity is prior to the activity of giving. This can be  demonstrated in the situation of sympathy, where it is the Other’s  suffering (not acting) that one shares. Here, Ricoeur argues that  “from the suffering Other there comes a giving that is no longer  drawn from the power of acting and existing, but precisely from  weakness itself” (OAA 188-9). In this case, the suffering Other is  unable to act, and yet gives. What the suffering Other gives to he or  she who shares this suffering is precisely the knowledge of their  shared vulnerability and the experience of the spontaneous  benevolence required to bear that knowledge.    As might be supposed from Ricoeur’s view of embodied subjectivity,  one is always already an Other to oneself. So, love and understanding  for others, and love and understanding for oneself, are two sides of  the same sheet of paper, so to speak. One becomes who one is through  relations with the Other, whether in the instance of one’s own body  or another’s. Reciprocity forms the basis of those productive and  self-affirming relations central to so much of ethics, namely  friendship and justice. Its corruption leads to self-loathing and the  destruction of self-esteem, which goes hand-in-hand with harm to  others and injustice. For Ricoeur, friendship and justice become the  chief virtues because of their crucial role in the well-being of  selfhood, and thus, in maintaining the conditions of possibility of  selfhood.  Friends and just institutions not only protect against the  suffering of self-destruction to which one is always vulnerable, they  provide the means for reconstructing and redeeming damaged lives. The  theme of redemption runs right through Ricoeur’s work, and no doubt  it has a religious origin. However, the notion of redemption can be  viewed in secular terms as the counterpart to the constructive nature  of one’s identity, and the temporal complexity of the human situation  which calls for interpretation.
 7. References and Further Reading

Marcel, Gabriel. Being and Having: an existentialist diary (New York: Harper and Row, 1965).
Marcel, Gabriel. The Mystery of Being: 1, Reflection and  Mystery (Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1960).
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice.  The Visible and The Invisible, trans.  Alphonso Lingis (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1968).
Ricoeur, Paul. “Explanation and Understanding” in  From Text to  Action, trans. Kathleen Blamey and John Thompson (Evanston, Ill:  Northwestern University Press, 1991).
Ricoeur, Paul. “Humans as the  Subject Matter of Philosophy” in The Narrative Path, The Later  Works of Paul Ricoeur, eds. T. Peter Kemp and David Rasmussen  (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1988).
Ricoeur, Paul. “Intellectual Autobiography” in Lewis Edwin Hahn, ed.,  The Philosophy of Paul Ricoeur, The Library of Living Philosophers  Volume XXII (Chicago, Illinois: Open Court, 1995).
Ricoeur, Paul. “What is Dialectical?” in Freedom and Morality  ed. John Bricke,  (Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1976).

 a. Selected Ricoeur Bibliography

History and Truth, trans.  Charles A Kelbley, (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University  Press, 1965)
Fallible Man, trans. Charles A Kelbley (New York: Fordham  University Press, 1986)
Freedom and Nature: The Voluntary and the Involuntary (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 1966)
Husserl: An Analysis of his Phenomenology, trans. E. G.  Ballard and L. E. Embree (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University  Press, 1966)
The Symbolism of Evil, trans. E. Buchanan (New York and  Evanston: Harper-Row, 1967)
Freud and Philosophy: an essay on interpretation, trans. D.  Savage (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1970)
Tragic Wisdom and Beyond, with Gabriel Marcel, trans. P.  McCormick and S. Jolin (Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University Press, 1973)
The Conflict of Interpretations. Essays in Hermeneutics,  trans. D. Ihde (Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University Press, 1974)
The Rule of Metaphor, multidisciplinary studies in the creation  of meaning in language (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978)
Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences. Essays on Language, Action  and Interpretation edited and trans. J. B. Thompson (Cambridge  and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981)
Time and Narrative, Volumes 1-3, trans. Kathleen Blamey and  David Pellauer (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1984  -1988)
From Text to Action, trans. Kathleen Blamey and John Thompson  (Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University Press, 1991)
Oneself as Another, trans. Kathleen Blamey (Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 1992)
Tolerance between intolerance and the intolerable (Providence: Berghahn Books, 1996)
Critique and conviction : conversations with FranÁois Azouvi and  Marc de Launay trans. Kathleen Blamey (New York: Columbia  University Press, 1998)
Thinking Biblically: Exegetical and Hermeneutical Studies,  with Andre LeCocque (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,  1998)
The Just, trans. David Pellauer (Chicago and London:  University of Chicago Press, 2000)
What Makes Us Think? A Neuroscientist and a Philosopher Argue  About Ethics, Human Nature and the Brain, with Jean-Pierre  Changeux, trans. M. B. DeBevoise (Princeton and Oxford: Princeton  University Press, 2000)

b. Further Reading

Henry Isaac Venema: Identifying selfhood : imagination, narrative, and hermeneutics in the thought of Paul Ricoeur (Albany, N.Y. : State University of New York Press, 2000)
Bernard P. Dauenhauer : Paul Ricoeur : the promise and risk of politics (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1998)
Charles E. Regan, Paul Ricoeur, his life and his work (Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press, 1996)
Lewis Edwin Hahn, ed. The Philosophy of Paul Ricoeur, The Library of Living Philosophers Volume XXII (Chicago, Illinois: Open Court, 1995)
David Wood, ed. On Paul Ricoeur (London & New York: Routledge, 1991)
S.H. Clark: Paul Ricoeur (London and New York: Routledge, 1990)
Patrick L. Bourgeois and Frank Schalow: Traces of understanding: a profile of Heidegger’s and Ricoeur’s hermeneutics (Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA : Rodopi, 1990)
T. Peter Kemp and David Rasmussen: The Narrative Path: The Later Works of Paul Ricoeur (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1989)
John B. Thompson: Critical hermeneutics : a study in the thought of Paul Ricoeur and Jurgen Habermas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981)
Charles E. Reagan ed: Studies in the Philosophy of Paul Ricoeur (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1979)
Don Ihde, Hermeneutic Phenomenology: The Philosophy of Paul Ricoeur (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1971)

Author Information
Kim Atkins
Email: kim.atkins@utas.edu.au
University of Tasmania
Tasmania





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







