








Ge Hong (Ko Hung) | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Ge Hong (Ko Hung, 283—343 C.E.)
Ge Hong was an eclectic philosopher who dedicated his life  to searching for physical immortality, which he thought was attainable through  alchemy. He lived during China’s tumultuous Period of Disunity (220-589 C.E.), a  time in which alien conqueror regimes ruled northern China, the cradle of  Chinese civilization, while a series of weak, transplanted Chinese states  occupied recently colonized southern China. These political conditions, along  with the social chaos they engendered, no doubt gave rise to Ge Hong’s ardent  desire to establish order and permanency in both his spiritual and secular  worlds. His most important contribution to Chinese philosophy was his attempt  to reconcile an immortality-centered   Daoism with   Confucianism. Equally  important, to establish political order, he also tried to reconcile Legalism  with Confucianism. His penetrating insight was that the teachings of no one  school could solve the problems that his world faced – only a combination of the  best methods of each could do so.
Table of Contents

 The Life of Ge Hong 
 Immortality 
 Reconciliation of Daoism and Confucianism 
 Confucianism and Legalism 
 The Importance of Broad Knowledge 
  Conclusion 
 References and Further Reading 

 1. The Life of Ge Hong
In 283 C.E., Ge Hong was born into a southern magnate family  whose native place was the Jurong district in Danyang prefecture, which was  near Nanjing, in the southwest corner of present day Jiangsu province. Both his  grandfather and father had reputations for broad learning and served as high  ministers for the Wu state, which ruled over southeastern China from 220-280. Ge’s  father continued to hold a number of middle level positions under the Western  Jin dynasty (265-317) that briefly reunited China. Upon his father’s death in  296, Ge endured a period of relative poverty and lost his family’s extensive library  due to civil strife. To educate himself, from this time on, he started copying  books and reading voraciously. He began with the Confucian classics, but soon  turned his attention to the various philosophical writings. Under the tutelage  of Zheng Yin, who was both a Confucian classicist and a Daoist adept, Ge began  his studies of the immortality arts. Zheng Yin himself was a disciple of Ge’s  uncle, Ge Xuan (164-244), a Daoist adept who was reputed to have become an  immortal.
Like other southern gentry, Ge Hong’s early career was spent  in military positions. He had an extensive knowledge of martial affairs and was  trained in the use of arms. In 303, at the age of twenty, he was called upon to  organize and lead a militia in his native place against a rebel army, which he handily  defeated. In a rare admission of violence for a Chinese literatus, he even  relates that, with bow and arrow, two men and a horse died at his hands. In  305, after being promoted to the rank of a General Who Makes the Waves Submit, Ge  tried to make his way to Luoyang, the capital. Although his autobiography tells  us he did so “to look for unusual books,” he was probably also hoping  to obtain a promotion. However, due to the Rebellion of the Eight Princes that  was being fought throughout northern China, he never made it; instead, he  wandered throughout southern China. To escape from the turmoil that was  embroiling the rest of China, he finally accepted a position as a military  councilor under his friend who was appointed to be the governor of Guangzhou (Canton),  a port city in the far south.
After his patron was killed enroute to assuming the  governorship, Ge refused many other military appointments and remained in Guangzhou  for the next eight years, living the life of a recluse at nearby Mount Luofu. In  314, he returned to his native place of Jurong. There, he studied under another  Daoist adept named Bao Qing (260-330), the former governor of Nanhai  prefecture, who was so impressed that he gave Ge his eldest daughter in  marriage. It was during this long period of reclusion that Ge wrote his two  part magnum opus whose title bore his sobriquet: the Inner Chapters of the  Master Who Embraces Simplicity and the Outer Chapters of the Master Who  Embraces Simplicity. Ge used the Daoist Inner Chapters to  substantiate the reality of immortality and convey the methods for realizing  it, while the Confucian Outer Chapters describe the problems afflicting  the secular world and his proposed solutions. In fact, until the fourteenth  century, the Inner Chapters and Outer Chapters circulated  independently from each other. With these two works, Ge aspired to establish  his own school of philosophy. Also at this time, illustrative of his  aspirations, Ge compiled hagiographical works entitled Biographies of Divine  Transcedents and Biographies of Recluses.
With the establishment of the Eastern Jin dynasty in  southern China in 317, the transplanted throne was eager to gain the allegiance  of powerful southern gentry families; thus, men such as Ge Hong were showered  with official appointments, which were usually more honorary than substantive  in nature. In recognition of his past military successes, Ge himself was given  the title of Marquis of the Region Within the Pass. Finally, in 326, Wang Dao  (276-339), the prime minister, appointed him to a series of positions, ending  with that of military advisor. By 332, due to his advanced age (he was 50) and  desire to find ingredients for immortality elixirs, he begged to be given a  post in northern part of present-day Vietnam. On his way there, the governor of    Guangzhou, Deng Yue, detained him there indefinitely. He thus took up  residence at nearby Mount Luofu where he engaged in immortality practices until  his death in 343.
By his own admission, Ge Hong was a man that was out of  sorts with his age. He was a southerner in an age where only northern émigrés  were given posts of substance. Due to his lack of verbal eloquence, he could  never obtain social prestige in the salons where men were prized for their  ability to engage in “Pure Talk” – abstract philosophical  discussions. Nor did his strong Confucian sense of morality sit well with the  libertine tendencies of that prevailed among the northern émigrés. The outlet  of his frustrations became his writings, in which he attacked the fashions and  trends of his day and proposed his own vision of how people should obtain  stability in an instable world.
 2. Immortality
Ge Hong wholeheartedly believed that anyone, through unrelenting  effort and study, could obtain immortality. One does not have to be either rich  or powerful to do so; in fact, wealth and position are harmful because they  inhibit one from attaining the necessary moral and physical serenity. Moreover,  it is not up to the arbitrary decisions of deities to extend our lives – they  are merely divine administrators who keep track of our sins and good deeds;  consequently, sacrifices and prayers to them for this purpose are useless. Thus,  whether one can obtain immortality is entirely based on his or her own  diligence and determination. It was precisely for those educated people who  wanted and were willing to work towards obtaining immortality that Ge wrote his  Inner Chapters. The overriding importance that he attached to obtaining  eternal life is evident in that the inner, and thereby his most important,  chapters of his magnum opus were dedicated to the topic.
Ge Hong firmly believed that physical immortality was possible.  This is because all things are permeated by the metaphysical oneness, xuan (the mystery), which creates and animates all things. Significantly, for Ge, xuan is synonymous with the words dao (the way, the ultimate reality) and yi (the one, the unity). In this light, he describes xuan in the  following manner: it “carries within it the embryo of the Original One, it  forms and shapes the two Principles (Yin and Yang); it exhales and absorbs the  great Genesis, it inspires and transforms the multitude of species, it makes  constellations go round, it shaped the primordial Darkness, it guides the  wonderful mainspring of the universe, it exhales the four seasons … if one adds  to it, it does not increase. If one takes away from it, it does not grow less. If  something is given to it, it is not increased in glory. If something is taken  from it, it does not suffer. Where the Mystery is present, joy is infinite;  where the Mystery has departed, efficacy is exhausted and the spirit  disappears” (Robinet, 82-83). In other words, the key to  immortality is maintaining this everlasting oneness within oneself – if one  cannot do so, he or she will soon die. The reason why people lose it is that  they become attached through their desires to the outside world, thereby  forgetting the jewel that resides within. As Ge put it, “The way of xuan is obtained within oneself, but is lost due to things outside oneself. Those  who employ xuan are gods; those who forget it are merely [empty] vessels.”
How does one maintain the unity within oneself? For Ge Hong  it had much to do with preserving, enhancing, and refining one’s qi,  which for him embodied the metaphysical mystery. Qi, which originally  meant “breath” or “vapor,” came to designate the vital  energy that exists within and animates all things. As Ge Hong relates,  “people reside within qi and qi resides within people. From  heaven and earth down to the ten thousand things, each one requires qi to  live. As for those who excel at circulating their qi, internally they  are able to nourish their body; externally, they are able to repel  illnesses.” Since each person receives a finite amount of qi at  birth, he recommends various methods to retain and enhance it, which include breathing  exercises, sexual techniques, calisthenics, dietary restrictions, and the  ingestion of herbal medicines. Since none of these methods is infallible, he  recommends that an adept should practice a number of them in combination with  each other. By doing so, one protects oneself from manifold disasters, such as  illnesses, demons, savage beasts and weapons, while also lessening desires, transforming  the body, and extending one’s lifespan. These methods could even give their  practitioners supernatural powers, such as curing illnesses, raising the dead,  seeing the future, commanding gods and ghosts, forgoing food for years, and the  ability to disappear.
Nevertheless, none of these techniques could permanently keep  xuan within oneself. To do that, nothing was comparable with taking  alchemically created medicines. Ge thus informs us that, “Even if one  performs breathing exercises and calisthenics, as well as ingests herbal  medicines, this can only extend the years of your lifespan, but it will not  save you from death. Ingesting divine cinnabar will make your lifespan  inexhaustible. You will last as long as heaven and earth, be able to travel on  clouds and ride dragons, and ascend at will to the Heaven of Highest  Clarity.” Alchemically derived medicines, the best of which contained  either liquefied gold or reverted cinnabar, were able to have this marvelous  effect because the substances from which they were made had shown themselves,  through repeated firings in the alchemist’s stove, to be impervious to decay or  dissolution. According to Ge, “As for forging of gold and cinnabar, the  longer one burns them, the more marvelous their transformations. When gold  enters the flames, even after one hundred firings, it will not disappear. If  you bury it forever, it will never decay. If one ingests these two substances,  they will refine that person’s body, and make it so that he or she will neither  age nor die.” In other words, one makes one’s own body imperishable by  ingesting imperishable things. Mechanically what happens is that, upon  ingestion, these substances seep into one’s blood and qi, thereby making    them stronger. Ge Hong calls this using an outside substance to fortify one’s  self. The reason why herbs are inferior to gold and cinnabar is that they are  perishable; thus, they lack the capacity to make the body imperishable. Unfortunately  though, the ingredients for making these mineral medicines are difficult to  obtain, the process of smelting them is arduous, and the ritual circumstances under  which they must be made are elaborate; as a result, Ge Hong several times  admits that he has never had enough resources to attempt to produce these superb  formulas.
 3.Reconciliation of Daoism and Confucianism
It is often said of premodern Chinese literati that they  were Daoist at home while Confucian in the office. Ge Hong was in fact probably  one of the first Chinese thinkers to consciously try to reconcile Confucianism  and Daoism. As the division of his major work into inner and outer chapters  indicates, he did so by asserting that Confucianism and Daoism addressed  different aspects of life. Confucianism addressed the external world and  provided means by which to ameliorate its many problems; Daoism concerned the  inner world and provided means by which to attain immortality. As Ge succinctly  put it, “For an extraordinarily talented person, what difficulty could  there be in practicing both (Confucianism and Daoism) at the same time? Inwardly,  such people treasure the way of nourishing life; outwardly, they exhibit their  brilliance in the world. If they regulate their persons, their persons then  will be cultivated for a prolonged time; if they rule the country, the country  will achieve the state of great peace.” Cultivating one’s spirit for  immortality thereby automatically enables one to rule a country well. Thus, if  one becomes a terrestrial immortal, Ge Hong sees no reason why such a person  cannot hold office and contribute to the welfare of his generation.
Nevertheless, even though both were important, Daoism was  even more so. That is because in the far past the sage kings followed the Dao “the oneness” or “the natural order of things,” as a  result, the people’s conduct was flawless and natural processes transpired  smoothly without disruption or disaster. Later kings, however, no longer  followed the Dao; consequently, natural disasters occurred frequently  and people became evil and unruly. It was only at this point that Confucianism  was introduced in an attempt to rectify this situation. Thus, Daoism is  superior because it kept the world from becoming chaotic; Confucianim, on the  other hand, only appeared when the world declined into disorder and its practitioners  have often become entangled in the resulting mess. Thus, Daoists, like  Confucians, provide the world with moral order, but they do so without becoming  soiled in the process. As Ge Hong put it, “In regard to the Daoists, their  making consists of excelling in cultivating the self to complete their duties;  their repose consists in excelling in doing away with the impurities of people;  their governance consists of excelling in cutting off misfortune before it  occurs; their giving consists in excelling at saving things, but not  considering it virtuous; their activity consist in excelling at using their  heart-mind to urge the people [to do good]; their quiescence consists in  excelling at being cautious and without rancor. These characteristics are why Daoism  is the ruler and leader of the hundred schools of philosophy and why it is the  ancestor of [Confucian] righteous and benevolence.” Nevertheless, since  only a few people are able to correctly pursue Daoism and present times are  disordered, Confucianism is necessary to maintain the social order that is  embodied in the family and the state. Very much in a Confucian vein, he  evaluates both philosophies through a moral lenses.
One of the ways in which Ge Hong connected Confucianism and  Daoism is by stating that one needed to perfect oneself ethically to pursue  immortality. In his Inner Chapters, Ge Hong makes it clear that none of  the methods for prolonging one’s life will work unless one is morally pure,  which can only happen by realizing Confucian virtues. Ge explicitly states  that, “those who seek to become immortals must regard loyalty, filiality, peacefulness,  obedience, benevolence and trustworthiness as fundamental. If one does not  cultivate his or her moral behavior, and merely instead devotes oneself to  esoteric methods, he or she will never obtain an extended lifespan.” Since  these virtues, particularly that of benevolence (ren), emphasize putting  the interests of others before one’s own, they cultivated a sense of  selflessness and detachment that Ge viewed as essential for maintaining the  mysterious oneness within oneself.
His strong emphasis on morality led him to systematize and  quantify earlier ideas about how spirits punished immoral behavior. Ge Hong  maintained that for each minor moral transgression one committed, the Director  of Fates would subtract three days from his or her lifespan; for each major  transgression, three hundred days would be deducted. To guide people’s  behavior, he even listed sixty-four possible sins. Very few of these prohibitions  are religious in nature – the overwhelming majority concern secular life and  many are Confucian inspired. Furthermore, he posited that, to achieve spiritual  benefits, one had to continuously accumulate good deeds: 300 were needed to  become an earthbound immortal and 1200 to become a celestial immortal. One  mishap and the balance would be canceled. Ge Hong even transformed the three  corpses, evil entities within the body who endeavor to destroy it to earn their  freedom, into ethical agents that try to decimate their host’s health by  disclosing his sins to the celestial authorities. This system of measuring good  and bad deeds would later giver rise to the Ledgers of Merit and Demerit,  popular books that let people keep track of their moral progress by assigning  numerical scores to virtuous and immoral behavior.
Ge Hong also attempted to reconcile Daoism with Confucianism  by both emphasizing the importance and naturalness of hierarchy and attacking  Daoism’s equalitarian tendencies. Although Laozi and Zhuangzi always assumed  that kings would exist, their utopian vision of society was a small village  society whose inhabitants never leave their hamlets, do not use contrivances,  and have few material goods. In order to attack this line of thinking in his Outer  Chapters, Ge Hong puts forth the views of a man named Bao Jingyan who  extended the Daoist arguments to their logical conclusion. Bao maintains that  the simple agrarian utopias in which people lived simply and equally were lost  due to the creation of hierarchy, which was based on the strong oppressing the  weak and the smart deceiving the foolish. With the lord/subject tie came a host  of evils such as weapons, armies, rebellions, greed, thievery, deceit,  extravagance, and crime. Thus, Bao advocated the abolishment of rulers as the  key to securing peace and happiness. Incidentally, Bao is the earliest known  Chinese advocate of anarchy. Ge Hong, on the contrary, thinks that in a state  of nature people think only of their own desires, hence they vie with each other  like beasts for scarce resources. Hierarchy was thus established to put an end  to the strong oppressing the weak. Moreover, hierarchy is natural: as the  oneness unfolds into the ten thousand things, it divides itself into high and  low; hence, heaven is above and earth is below. Thus, it is only natural that  some people are more important than others. This is true to the extent that  even immortals are hierarchically organized: freshly minted immortals must  occupy the lower rungs of the celestial bureaucracy and serve their superiors,  while terrestrial immortals are inferior to their celestial counterparts. Ge  also recognized that civilization could not be undone and that hierarchy had  brought about material progress, as the following passage indicates: “Now,  [would you be at ease] if I made you reside in the cramped quarters of a nest  or cave? [Would you be at ease] if upon your death, your body was abandoned in  the fields? [Would you be at ease] if upon being impeded by a river, you had to  swim to cross it? [Would you be at ease] if upon traveling through the  mountains, you had to walk and shoulder luggage? [Would you be at ease] if your  cooking implements were cast away and you had to make do with raw and smelly  food? [Would you be at ease] if you no longer had stone needles for acupuncture  and had to merely rely on nature to [cure] your illness? [Would you be at ease]  if nakedness was your only ornament and you had no clothes? [Would you be at  ease] if you came across a female and made her your mate without an  intermediary? You and I would both likely say, ‘to do these things would be  impossible.’ How much less could we do without a lord!” In other words,  progress and hierarchy are realities, and beneficial ones at that, which can neither  be ignored nor abandoned.
 4. Confucianism and Legalism
Since Ge Hong recognized that this world cannot be ignored,  he believed that one must find a way to improve it. Given the corruption and  chaos that ruled his age, like many of his contemporaries, he looked for  answers beyond Confucianism to its arch nemesis, Legalism. His reform program  was thus a synthesis of both Confucian and Legalist political ideas. First of  all, even though he believed that the ruler, like a good Confucian sovereign,  should cultivate his person, lead the people through his own moral example, and  take their welfare as his overriding concern, he admitted that this was not  sufficient to guide society. To govern well, one had to have clear laws to  punish miscreants. He warns us that, “It is not that governing with  benevolence is not wonderful, it is just that the black-haired masses can be  crafty and deceitful. They hanker after profit and forget righteousness. If one  does not order them with one’s authority and correct them with punishments, if  one only admires the ways of Fuxi and Shennong (Confucian cultural heroes),  then chaos cannot be avoided and the resulting calamities will be numerous. [Yet]  to use killing to stop killing, how could anyone find joy in that?” In  short, although leading through one’s moral example is preferable, it is not  realistic: it is sometimes necessary to use the harsher methods. Since  Confucian moral example was not enough, the ruler must turn to the law and mete  out punishments. Following Legalist ideas, Ge argues that the laws must be  clear, explicit, and fair; i.e., they must be applicable to everyone. Moreover,  the punishments for misbehavior must be severe. It is precisely generous  rewards and harsh punishments that will keep the strong from oppressing the  weak. Regimes are weak because their laws are neither severe nor enforced. In  line with this thinking, Ge was in favor of reviving punishments that mutilated  the guilty. Convicts suffering from such punishments would be constant  reminders to the people of the terrible price to be paid for violating the law.  Lest the modern reader judge Ge harshly for supporting such draconian measures,  since the death penalty largely replaced the mutilation punishments, Ge thought  the latter was more humane, since at least the criminal would escape with his  or her life.
Another way in which Ge Hong tried to reconcile Confucianism  and Legalism was through the type of training officials should receive. Under  the Legalist Qin dynasty (221-207 BCE), which unified China for the first time,  officials were largely men who excelled in legal and administrative matters. During  the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE), particularly during its latter half,  Confucianism gradually became the dominant ideology, hence the education and  knowledge of officials became more centered on the Confucian classics. Men who  primarily specialized in legal matters were slighted and only given clerical  positions. Due to this situation, Ge complained that officials, no matter what  their level, no longer understood the laws, hence they often issued incorrect  judgments and were deceived by their more legally savvy underlings. Consequently,  he thought that aspirants to officialdom should be tested not only on the  Confucian classics, but also on the law.
 5. The Importance of Broad Knowledge
That officials should be knowledgeable in both the classics  and the law highlights one of his most consistent teachings: a person must be  broadly educated and that deep study leads to the mastery of all things. For Ge  Hong, through the diligent acquisition of knowledge, anything was possible,  whether it be ruling a country or attaining immortality. In this vein, he said,  “When one peels away dark clouds, one exposes the sun; as a result, the  ten thousand things cannot hide their shapes. By unrolling bamboo and silk  (that is, by reading books) and investigating the past and present, heaven and  earth thereby hide none of their facts. How much less so gods and demons? And  how much less so the affairs of people?” Nevertheless, one could not just  specialize in one kind of learning, but had to learn the teachings of many  different schools. Likewise, in seeking immortality, one should study many  techniques and never merely practice one exclusively. Similarly, in terms of  book learning, one should not merely confine oneself to learning the classics  because all written works had something of worth. Indeed, he propounded the  revolutionary sentiment that the elaborate writings of his day were superior to  the simplistic classics. The more widely one read, and the more techniques one  acquired, the more one would be likely to excel in both the spiritual and  secular worlds. Study was also a means of self-cultivation – through it one  could eliminate desires by becoming indifferent to his or her physical  circumstances.
According to Ge Hong, one of the primary reasons governance  of his time was so inept and ineffective was that officials were not selected  on the basis of their intelligence, but only due to their connections, bribery,  or their ability to speak eloquently. Ge thought the solution to this problem  would be to use examinations to select men on the basis of their knowledge of  the classics and administrative matters. The examinations should be held in the  palace, supervised by high officials, and their contents should be kept in the  utmost secrecy. By this means, there would be little opportunity to pass the  examinations through deceit or bribery. Moreover, when the only way to become  an official is through examinations, everyone will value study. Although he  admitted that passing the examinations would not guarantee that that person  would be a good official, he thought that the ability to do so was a fair  indicator of talent. In other words, Ge Hong was one of the earliest proponents  of selecting officials through a vigorous and fair examination system, one of  the hallmarks of Chinese civilization.
 6. Conclusion
In sum, Ge Hong was a philosopher who, due to the  topsy-turvy world in which he lived, was willing to look for solutions in the  wisdom of any philosopher, regardless of his sectarian background. With Ge’s  overriding sense of the importance of morality and his overwhelming urge for permanency  in the form of immortality, he reconciled Confucian and Daoism by saying that  both were trying to improve the condition of mankind and that practicing  Confucian virtues was necessary for attaining immortality. Likewise, this  search for concrete, no-nonsense answers also led him to reconcile his  Confucian leanings with the real politick teachings of Legalism. Thus, although  he maintained that the ruler must endeavor to mold his people’s behavior  through his own example, generous rewards and severe punishments were even more  important in regulating the affairs of the troublesome masses. In order to  manifest both these philosophies, Ge advocated that officials be both experts  in the classics and legal matters. Thus, Ge helped fashion the values that  allowed latter Chinese to unproblematically simultaneously use Daoist,  Confucian, and Legalist assumptions in both their public and private lives.
 7. References and Further Reading

Balazs, Etienne. Chinese Civilization and Bureaucracy.    New Haven: Yale University  Press, 1964.

Besides giving a valuable introduction to the  tumultuous intellectual and social milieu in which Ge Hong lived, this work  also translates part of the chapter from his Outer Chapters in which Ge  Hong critiques the anarchist Bao Jingyan.


Campany, Robert Ford. To Live as Long as Heaven and  Earth: A Translation and Study of Ge Hong’s Traditions of Divine Transcendents. Berkeley:  University of California Press, 2002.

This fine translation of Ge Hong’s  biographies of immortals has an introduction that insightfully describes his  religious ideas.


Lai Chi-Tim, “Ko Hung’s Discourse of Hsien-Immortality:  A Daoist Configuration of an Alternate Ideal Self-Identity,” Numen 45 (1998):  183-220.

Although somewhat turgid, this article successfully delineates the  novel aspects of Ge Hong’s views on immortality and situates his religious  beliefs within the social and political context in which they were formed.


Robinet, Isabelle. Daoism: Growth of a Religion,  translated by Phyllis Brooks. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997.

Robinet devotes an entire  chapter of this work to Ge Hong and masterfully contextualizes his thought within  the Daoist religious tradition.


Sailey, Jay. The Master Who Embraces Simplicity: A Study  of the Philosopher Ko Hung, A.D. 283-343. San Francisco: Chinese Materials  Center, Inc., 1978.

The author translates twenty-one chapters of Ge Hong’s Outer  Chapters. He also deftly summarizes Ge Hong’s ideas as seen in this work.


Sivin, Nathan. “On the Pao P’u Tzu Nei Pien and  the Life of Ko Hong (283-343),” Isis 60 (1976): 388-391.

In this short article, Sivin makes some  important points about the circulation of his works and the length of his life.


Sivin, Nathan. “On the Word ‘Daoist’ as a Source of  Perplexity.” History of Religions 17 (1978): 303-330.

This intellectually penetrating article  challenges the idea that Ge Hong was a Daoist at all, in the sense that he was  not at all connected with organized Daoist religion.


Ware, James R. Alchemy, Medicine & Religion in the China of A.D. 320: The Nei P’ien of Ko Hung. Rpt; New York: Dover Publications, Inc.,  1981.

Originally published in 1966, this work is a complete translation of Ge  Hong’s The Inner Chapters. The reader must beware, though, since the  text is inaccurately translated through Judeo-Christian lenses.


Yu, David C. History of Chinese Daoism: Volume 1. Lanham:  University Press of America, 2000.

This overview of the history of Daoism  devotes a lengthy chapter to Ge Hong with extensive quotations to his views on  immortality.



Author Information
Keith Knapp
Email: keith.knapp@citadel.edu
The Citadel
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







