








Epsilon Calculi | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Epsilon Calculi
Epsilon Calculi are extended forms of the predicate calculus that incorporate epsilon terms.  Epsilon terms are individual terms of the form ‘εxFx’, being defined for all predicates in the language.  The epsilon term ‘εxFx’ denotes a chosen F, if there are any F’s, and has an arbitrary reference otherwise.  Epsilon calculi were originally developed to study certain forms of arithmetic, and set theory; also to prove some  important meta-theorems about the predicate calculus.  Later formal  developments have included a variety of intensional epsilon calculi, of use  in the study of necessity, and more general intensional notions, like belief. An epsilon term such as ‘εxFx’ was originally read as ‘the first F’, and in arithmetical contexts as ‘the least F’. More generally it can be read as the demonstrative description ‘that F’, when arising either deictically, that is, in a pragmatic context where some F is being pointed at, or in linguistic cross-reference situations, as with, for example, ‘There is a red-haired man in the room.  That red-haired man is Caucasian’. The application of epsilon terms to natural language shares some features with  the use of iota terms within the theory of descriptions given by Bertrand  Russell, but differs in formalising aspects of a slightly different theory of reference, first given by Keith Donnellan.  More recently, epsilon terms have been used by a number of writers to formalise cross-sentential anaphora, which would arise if ‘that red-haired man’ in the linguistic case above was replaced with a pronoun such as ‘he’.  There is then also the  similar application in intensional cases, like ‘There is a red-haired man in the room.  Celia believed he was a woman.’
Table of Contents

Introduction 
Descriptions and Identity 
Rigid Epsilon Terms 
The Epsilon Calculus’ Problematic 
The Formal Semantics of Epsilon Terms 
Some Metatheory 
References and Further Reading

1. Introduction
Epsilon terms were introduced by the german mathematician David Hilbert, in  Hilbert 1923, 1925, to provide explicit definitions of the existential and  universal quantifiers, and resolve some problems in infinitistic  mathematics.  But it is not just the related formal results, and structures  which are of interest.  In Hilbert’s major book Grundlagen der Mathematik,  which he wrote with his collaborator Paul Bernays, epsilon terms were  presented as formalising certain natural language constructions, like  definite descriptions.  And they in fact have a considerably larger range  of such applications, for instance in the symbolisation of certain  cross-sentential anaphora.  Hilbert and Bernays also used their epsilon  calculus to prove two important meta-theorems about the predicate calculus.  One theorem subsequently led, for instance, to the development of semantic  tableaux: it is called the First Epsilon Theorem, and its content and proof  will be given later, in section 6 below.  A second theorem that Hilbert and  Bernays proved, which we shall also look at then, establishes that epsilon  calculi are conservative extensions of the predicate calculus, that is, that no  more theorems expressible just in the quantificational language of the  predicate calculus can be proved in epsilon calculi than can be proved in  the predicate calculus itself.  But while epsilon calculi do have these  further important formal functions, we will not only be concerned to  explore them, for we shall also first discuss the natural language  structures upon which epsilon calculi have a considerable bearing.
The growing awareness of the larger meaning and significance of  epsilon calculi has only come in stages.  Hilbert and Bernays introduced  epsilon terms for several meta-mathematical purposes, as above, but the  extended presentation of an epsilon calculus, as a formal logic of interest  in its own right, in fact only first appeared in Bourbaki’s Éléments de  Mathématique (although see also Ackermann 1937-8).  Bourbaki’s epsilon  calculus with identity (Bourbaki, 1954, Book 1) is axiomatic, with Modus  Ponens as the only primitive inference or derivation rule.  Thus, in effect, we get:
(X ∨ X) → X,
X → (X ∨ Y),
(X ∨ Y) → (Y ∨ X),
(X ∨ Y) → ((Z ∨ X) → (Z ∨ Y)),
Fy → FεxFx,
x = y → (Fx ↔ Fy),
(x)(Fx ↔ Gx) → εxFx = εxGx.
This adds to a basis for the propositional calculus an epsilon axiom  schema, then Leibniz’ Law, and a second epsilon axiom schema, which is a  further law of identity.  Bourbaki, though, used the Greek letter tau  rather than epsilon to form what are now called ‘epsilon terms’;  nevertheless, he defined the quantifiers in terms of his tau symbol in the  manner of Hilbert and Bernays, namely:
(∃x)Fx ↔ FεxFx,
(x)Fx ↔ Fεx¬Fx;
and note that, in his system the other usual law of identity, ‘x = x’, is  derivable.
The principle purpose Bourbaki found for his system of logic was in  his theory of sets, although through that, in the modern manner, it thereby  came to be the foundation for the rest of mathematics.  Bourbaki’s theory  of sets discriminates amongst predicates those which determine sets: thus  some, but only some, predicates determine sets, i.e. are ‘collectivisantes’.  All the main axioms of classical Set Theory are incorporated in his theory,  but he does not have an Axiom of Choice as a separate axiom, since its  functions are taken over by his tau symbol.  The same point holds in  Bernays’ epsilon version of his set theory (Bernays 1958, Ch VIII).
Epsilon calculi, during this period, were developed without any  semantics, but a semantic interpretation was produced by Gunter Asser in  1957, and subsequently published in a book by A.C. Leisenring, in 1969.  Even then, readings of epsilon terms in ordinary language were still  uncommon.  A natural language reading of epsilon terms, however, was  present in Hilbert and Bernays’ work. In fact the last chapter of book 1 of  the Grundlagen is a presentation of a theory of definite descriptions, and  epsilon terms relate closely to this.  In the more well known theory of  definite descriptions by Bertrand Russell (Russell 1905) there are three  clauses: with
The king of France is bald
we get, on Russell’s theory, first
there is a king of France,
second
there is only one king of France,
and third
anyone who is king of France is bald.
Russell uses the Greek letter iota to formalise the definite description,  writing the whole
BιxKx,
but he recognises the iota term is not a proper individual symbol.  He  calls it an ‘incomplete symbol’, since, because of the three parts, the  whole proposition is taken to have the quantificational analysis,
(∃x)(Kx & (y)(Ky → y = x) & (y)(Ky → By)),
which is equivalent to
(∃x)(Kx & (y)(Ky→ y = x) & Bx).
And that means that it does not have the form ‘Bx’.  Russell believed that,  in addition to his iota terms, there was another class of individual terms,  which he called ‘logically proper names’.  These would simply fit into the  ‘x’ place in ‘Bx’.  He believed that ‘this’ and ‘that’ were in this class,  but gave no symbolic characterisation of them.
Hilbert and Bernays, by contrast, produced what is called a  ‘pre-suppositional theory’ of definite descriptions.  The first two clauses  of Russell’s definition were not taken to be part of the meaning of ‘The  King of France is bald’: they were merely conditions under which they took  it to be permitted to introduce a complete individual term for ‘the King of  France’, which then satisfies
Kx & (y)(Ky → y = x).
Hilbert and Bernays continued to use the Greek letter iota in their  individual term, although it has a quite different grammar from Russell’s  iota term, since, when Hilbert and Bernays’ term can be introduced, it is  provably equivalent to the corresponding epsilon term (Kneebone 1963,  p102).  In fact it was later suggested by many that epsilon terms are not  only complete symbols, but can be seen as playing the same role as the  ‘logically proper names’ Russell discussed.
It is at the start of book 2 of the Grundlagen that we find the  definition of epsilon terms.  There, Hilbert and Bernays first construct a  theory of indefinite descriptions in a similar manner to their theory of  definite descriptions.  They allow, now, an eta term to be introduced as  long as just the first of Russell’s conditions is met.  That is to say,  given
(∃x)Fx,
one can introduce the term ‘ηxFx’, and say
FηxFx.
But the condition for the introduction of the eta term can be established  logically, for certain predicates, since
(∃x)((∃y)Fy → Fx),
is a predicate calculus theorem (Copi 1973, p110).  It is the eta term this  theorem allows us to introduce which is otherwise called an epsilon term,  and its logical basis enables entirely formal theories to be constructed,  since such individual terms are invariably defined.   Thus we may  invariably introduce ‘ηx((∃y)Fy → Fx)’, and this is commonly  written ‘εxFx’, about which we can therefore say
(∃y)Fy → FεxFx.
Since it is that F which exists if anything is F, Hilbert read the  epsilon term in this case ‘the first F’.  For instance, in arithmetic, ‘the  first’ may be taken to be the least number operator.  However, while if  there are F’s then the first F is clearly some chosen one of them, if there  are no F’s then ‘the first F’ must be a misnomer.  And that form of speech  only came to be fully understood in the theories of reference which  appeared much later, when reference and denotation came to be more clearly  separated from description and attribution.  Donnellan (Donnellan 1966)  used the example ‘the man with martini in his glass’, and pointed out that,  in certain uses, this can refer to someone without martini in his glass.  In the terminology Donnellan made popular, ‘the first F’, in the second  case above works similarly: it cannot be attributive, and so, while it  refers to something, it must refer arbitrarily, from a semantic point of  view.
With reference in this way separated from attribution it becomes  possible to symbolise the anaphoric cross-reference between, for instance,  ‘There is one and only one king of France’ and ‘He is bald’.  For,  independently of whether the former is true, the ‘he’ in the latter is a  pronoun for the epsilon term in the former — by a simple extension of the  epsilon definition of the existential quantifier.  Thus the pair of remarks  may be symbolised
(∃x)(Kx & (y)(Ky → y = x)) & Bεx(Kx & (y)(Ky → y = x)).
Furthermore such cross-reference may occur in connection with  intensional constructions of a kind Russell also considered, such as
George IV wondered whether the author of Waverley was Scott.
Thus we can say ‘There is an author of Waverley, and George IV wondered  whether he was Scott’.  But the epsilon analysis of these cases puts  intensional epsilon calculi at odds with Russellian views of such  constructions, as we shall see later.  The Russellian approach, by not  having complete symbols for individuals, tends to confuse cases in which assertions   are made about individuals and cases in which assertions are made about identifying  properties. As we shall see, epsilon terms enable us to make  the discrimination between, for instance,
s = εx(y)(Ay ↔ y = x),
(i.e. ‘Scott is the author of Waverley’), and
(y)(Ay ↔ y = s),
(that is, ‘there is one and only one author of Waverley and he is Scott’), and  so it enables us to locate more exactly the object of George IV’s thought.
 2. Descriptions and Identity
When one starts to ask about the natural language meaning of epsilon terms,  it is interesting that Leisenring just mentions the ‘formal superiority’ of  the epsilon calculus (Leisenring 1969, p63, see also Routley 1969, Hazen  1987).  Leisenring took the epsilon calculus to be a better logic than the  predicate calculus, but merely because of the Second Epsilon Theorem.  Its  main virtue, to Leisenring, was that it could prove all that seemingly  needed to be proved, but in a more elegant way.  Epsilon terms were just  neater at calculating which were the valid theorems of the predicate  calculus.
Remembering Hilbert and Bernays’ discussion of definite and  indefinite descriptions, clearly there is more to the epsilon calculus than  this.  And there are, in fact, two specific theorems provable within the  epsilon calculus, though not the predicate calculus, which will start to   indicate the epsilon calculus’ more general range of application.  They concern   individuals, since the epsilon calculus is distinctive in providing an  appropriate, and systematic means of reference to them.
The need to have complete symbols for individuals became evident  some years after Russell’s promotion of incomplete symbols for them.  The  first major book to allow for this was Rosser’s Logic for Mathematicians,  in 1953, although there were precursors.  For the classical difficulty with  providing complete terms for individuals concerns what to do with  ‘non-denoting’ terms, and Quine, for instance, following Frege, often gave  them an arbitrary, though specific referent (Marciszewski 1981, p113).  This idea is also present in Kalish and Montague (Kalish and Montague  1964, pp242-243), who gave the two rules:
(∃x)(y)(Fy ↔ y = x)   ├ FιxFx,
¬(∃x)(y)(Fy ↔ y = x) ├ιxFx = ιx¬(x = x),
where ‘ιxFx’ is what otherwise might be written ‘εx(y)(Fy ↔ y = x)’.  Kalish and Montague believed, however, that the second rule ‘has no  intuitive counterpart, simply because ordinary language shuns improper  definite descriptions’ (Kalish and Montague 1964, p244).  And, at that  time, what Donnellan was to publish in Donnellan 1966, about improper  definite descriptions, was certainly not well known.  In fact ordinary  speech does not shun improper definite descriptions, although their  referents are not as fixed as the above second rule requires.  Indeed the  very fact that the descriptions are improper means that their referents are  not determined semantically: instead they are just a practical, pragmatic  choice.
Stalnaker and Thomason recognised the need to be more liberal when  they defined their referential terms, which also had to refer, in the  contexts they were concerned with, in more than one possible world  (Thomason and Stalnaker 1968, p363):
In contrast with the Russellian analysis, definite descriptions are treated  as genuine singular terms; but in general they will not be substance terms  [rigid designators].  An expression like ιxPx is assigned a     referent  which may vary from world to world.  If in a given world there is a unique  existing individual which has the property corresponding to P, this  individual is the referent of ιxPx; otherwise, ιxPx refers to an  arbitrarily chosen individual which does not exist in that world.
Stalnaker and Thomason appreciated that ‘A substance term is much like what  Russell called a logically proper name’, but they said that an individual  constant might or might not be a substance term, depending on whether it  was more like ‘Socrates’ or ‘Miss America’ (Thomason and Stalnaker 1968,  p362).  A more complete investigation of identity and descriptions, in  modal and general intensional contexts, was provided in Routley, Meyer and  Goddard 1974, and Routley 1977, see also Hughes and Cresswell 1968, Ch 11.  And with these writers we get the explicit rendering of definite  descriptions in epsilon terms, as in Goddard and Routley 1973, p558,  Routley 1980, p277, c.f. Hughes and Cresswell 1968, p203.
Certain specific theorems in the epsilon calculus, as was said  before, support these kinds of identification.  One theorem demonstrates  directly the relation between Russell’s attributive, and some of  Donnellan’s referential ideas.  For
(∃x)(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x) & Gx)
is logically equivalent to
(∃x)(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)) & Ga,
where a = εx(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)).  This arises because the latter is  equivalent to
Fa & (y)(Fy → y = a) & Ga,
which entails the former.  But the former is
Fb & (y)(Fy → y = b) & Gb,
with b = εx(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x) & Gx), and so entails
(∃x)(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)),
and
Fa & (y)(Fy → y = a).
But that means that, from the uniqueness clause,
a = b,
and so
Ga,
meaning the former entails the latter, and therefore the former is  equivalent to the latter.
The former, of course, gives Russell’s Theory of Descriptions, in  the case of ‘The F is G’; it explicitly asserts the first two clauses, to  do with the existence and uniqueness of an F.  A presuppositional theory,  such as we saw in Hilbert and Bernays, would not explicitly assert these  two clauses: on such an account they are a precondition before the term  ‘the F’ can be introduced.  But neither of these theories accommodate  improper definite descriptions.  Since Donnellan it is more common to allow  that we can always use ‘the F’: if the description is improper then the  referent of this term is simply found in the term’s practical use.
One detail of Donnellan’s historical account, however, must be  treated with some care, at this point.  Donnellan was himself concerned  with definite descriptions which were improper in the sense that they did  not uniquely describe what the speaker took to be their referent.  So the  description might still be ‘proper’ in the above sense — if there still was  something to which it uniquely applied, on account of its semantic content.  Thus Donnellan allowed ‘the man with martini in his glass’ to identify  someone without martini in his glass irrespective of whether there was some  sole man with martini in his glass.  But if one talks about ‘the man with  martini in his glass’ one can be correctly taken to be talking about who  this describes, if it does in fact correctly describe someone — as Devitt  and Bertolet pointed out in criticism of Donnellan (Devitt 1974, Bertolet  1980).  It is this aspect of our language which the epsilon account  matches, for an epsilon account allows definite descriptions to refer  without attribution of their semantic character, but only if nothing  uniquely has that semantic character.  Thus it is not the whole of the  first statement above , but only the third part of the second statement  which makes the remark ‘The F is G’.
The difficulty with Russell’s account becomes more plain if we read  the two equivalent statements using relative and personal pronouns.  They  then become
There is one and only one F, which is G,
There is one and only one F; it is G.
But using just the logic derived from Frege, Russell could formalise the  ‘which’, but could not separate out the last clause, ‘it is G’.  In that  clause ‘it’ is an anaphor for ‘the (one and only) F’, and it still has this  linguistic meaning if there is no such thing, since that is just a matter  of grammar.  But the uniqueness clause is needed for the two statements to  be equivalent — without uniqueness there is no equivalence, as we shall see  – so ‘which’ is not itself equivalent to ‘it’.  Russell, however, because  he could not separate out the ‘it’, had to take the whole of the first  expression as the analysis of ‘The F is G’ — he could not formulate the  needed ‘logically proper name’.
But how can something be the one and only F ‘if there is no such  thing’?  That is where another important theorem provable in the epsilon  calculus is illuminating, namely:
(Fa & (y)(Fy → y = a)) → a = εx(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)).
The important thing is that there is a difference between the left hand  side and the right hand side, i.e. between something being alone F, and  that thing being the one and only F.  For the left-right implication cannot  be reversed.  We get from the left to the right when we see that the left  as a whole entails
(∃x)(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)),
and so also its epsilon equivalent
Fεx(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)) & (z)(Fz → z = εx(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x))).
Given Fa, then from the second clause here we get the right hand side of  our original implication.  But if we substitute ‘εx(Fx &     (y)(Fy → y = x))’ for ‘a’ in that implication then on the right we have something  which is necessarily true.  But the left hand side is then the same as
(∃x)(Fx & (y)(Fy → y = x)),
and that is in general contingent.  Hence the implication cannot generally  be reversed.  Having the property of being alone F is here contingent, but  possessing the identity of the one and only F is necessary.
The distinction is not made in Russell’s logic, since possession of  the relevant property is the only thing which can be formally expressed  there.  In Russell’s theory of descriptions, a’s possession of the property  of being alone a king of France is expressed as a quasi identity
a = ιxKx,
and that has the consequence that such identities are contingent.  Indeed,  in counterpart theories of objects in other possible worlds the idea is  pervasive that an entity may be defined in terms of its contingent  properties in a given world.  Hughes and Cresswell, however, differentiated  between contingent identities and necessary identities in the following way  (Hughes and Cresswell 1968, p191):
Now it is contingent that the man who is in fact the man who lives next  door is the man who lives next door, for he might have lived somewhere  else; that is living next door is a property which belongs contingently,  not necessarily, to the man to whom it does belong.  And similarly, it is  contingent that the man who is in fact the mayor is the mayor; for someone  else might have been elected instead.  But if we understand [The man who  lives next door is the mayor] to mean that the object which (as a matter of  contingent fact) possesses the property of being the man who lives next  door is identical with the object which (as a matter of contingent fact)  possesses the property of being the mayor, then we are understanding it to  assert that a certain object (variously described) is identical with  itself, and this we need have no qualms about regarding as a necessary  truth.  This would give us a way of construing identity statements which  makes [(x = y) → L(x = y)] perfectly acceptable: for whenever x = y     is true  we can take it as expressing the necessary truth that a certain object is  identical with itself.
There are more consequences of this matter, however, than Hughes and  Cresswell drew out.  For now that we have proper referring terms for  individuals to go into such expressions as ‘x = y’, we first see better where  the contingency of the properties of such individuals comes from — simply  the linguistic facility of using improper definite descriptions.  But we  also see, because identities between such terms are necessary, that proper  referring terms must be rigid, i.e. have the same reference in all possible  worlds.
This is not how Stalnaker and Thomason saw the matter.  Stalnaker  and Thomason, it will be remembered, said that there were two kinds of  individual constants: ones like ‘Socrates’ which can take the place of  individual variables, and others like ‘Miss America’ which cannot.  The  latter, as a result, they took to be non-rigid.  But it is strictly ‘Miss  America in year t’ which is meant in the second case, and that is not a  constant expression, even though such functions can take the place of  individual variables.  It was Routley, Meyer and Goddard who most seriously  considered the resultant possibility that all properly individual terms are  rigid.  At least, they worked out many of the implications of this  position, even though Routley was not entirely content with it.
Routley described several rigid intensional semantics (Routley  1977, pp185-186).  One of these, for instance, just took the first epsilon  axiom to hold in any interpretation, and made the value of an epsilon term  itself.  On such a basis Routley, Meyer and Goddard derived what may be  called ‘Routley’s Formula’, i.e.
L(∃x)Fx → (∃x)LFx.
In fact, on their understanding, this formula holds for any operator and  any predicate, but they had in mind principally the case of necessity  illustrated here, with ‘Fx’ taken as ‘x numbers the planets’, making  ‘εxFx’ ‘the number of the planets’.   The formula is derived     quite  simply, in the following way: from
L(∃x)Fx,
we can get
LFεxFx,
by the epsilon definition of the existential quantifier, and so
(∃x)LFx,
by existential generalisation over the rigid term (Routley, Meyer and  Goddard 1974, p308, see also Hughes and Cresswell 1968, pp197, 204).  Routley, however, was still inclined to think that a rigid semantics was  philosophically objectionable (Routley 1977, p186):
Rigid semantics tend to clutter up the semantics for enriched systems with  ad hoc modelling conditions.  More important, rigid semantics, whether  substitutional or objectual, are philosophically objectionable.  For one  thing, they make Vulcan and Hephaestus everywhere indistinguishable though  there are intensional claims that hold of one but not of the other.  The  standard escape from this sort of problem, that of taking proper names like  ‘Vulcan’ as disguised descriptions we have already found wanting… Flexible  semantics, which satisfactorily avoid these objections, impose a more  objectual interpretation, since, even if [the domain] is construed as the  domain of terms, [the value of a term in a world] has to be permitted, in  some cases at least, to vary from world to world.
As a result, while Routley, Meyer and Goddard were still prepared to defend  the formula, and say, for instance, that there was a number which  necessarily numbers the planets, namely the number of the planets (np),  they thought that this was only in fact the same as 9, so that one still  could not argue correctly that as L(np numbers the planets), so L(9 numbers  the planets).  ‘For extensional identity does not warrant  intersubstitutivity in intensional frames’ (Routley, Meyer and Goddard  1974, p309).  They held, in other words that the number of the planets was  only contingently 9.
This means that they denied ‘(x = y) → L(x = y)’, but, as we     shall  see in more detail later, there are ways to hold onto this principle, i.e.  maintain the invariable necessity of identity.
 3. Rigid Epsilon Terms
There is some further work which has helped us to understand how reference  in modal and general intensional contexts must be rigid.  But it involves  some different ideas in semantics, and starts, even, outside our main area  of interest, namely predicate logic, in the semantics of propositional  logic.
When one thinks of ‘semantics’ one maybe thinks of the valuation of  formulas. Since the 1920s a meta-study of this kind was certainly added to  the previous logical interest in proof theory.  Traditional proof theory is  commonly associated with axiomatic procedures, but, from a modern  perspective, its distinction is that it is to do with ‘object languages’.  Tarski’s theory of truth relies crucially on the distinction between object  languages and meta-languages, and so semantics generally seems to be  necessarily a meta-discipline.  In fact Tarski believed that such an  elevation of our interest was forced upon us by the threat of semantic  paradoxes like The Liar.  If there was, by contrast, ‘semantic closure’,  i.e. if truth and other semantic notions were definable at the object  level, then there would be contradictions galore (c.f. Priest 1984).  In  this way truth may seem to be necessarily a predicate of (object-level)  sentences.
But there is another way of looking at the matter which is  explicitly non-Tarskian, and which others have followed (see Prior 1971, Ch  7, Sayward 1987).  This involves seeing ‘it is true that’ as not a  predicate, but an object-level operator, with the truth tabulations in  Truth Tables, for instance, being just another form of proof procedure.  Operators indeed include ‘it is provable that’, and this is distinct from  Gödel’s provability predicate, as Gödel himself pointed out (Gödel 1969).  Operators are intensional expressions, as in the often discussed ‘it is  necessary that’ and ‘it is believed that’, and trying to see such forms of  indirect discourse as metalinguistic predicates was very common in the  middle of the last century.  It was pervasive, for instance, in Quine’s  many discussions of modality and intensionality.  Wouldn’t someone be  believing that the Morning Star is in the sky, but the Evening Star is not,  if, respectively, they assented to the sentence ‘the Morning Star is in the  sky’, and dissented from ‘the Evening Star is in the sky’?  Anyone saying  ‘yes’ is still following the Quinean tradition, but after Montague’s and  Thomason’s work on operators (e.g. Montague 1963, Thomason 1977, 1980) many  logicians are more persuaded that indirect discourse is not quotational.  It is open to doubt, that is to say, whether we should see the mind in terms   of the direct words which the subject would use.
The alternative involves  seeing the words ‘the Morning Star is in the sky’ in such an indirect  speech locution as ‘Quine believes that the Morning Star is in the sky’ as  words merely used by the reporter, which need not directly reflect what the  subject actually says.  That is indeed central to reported speech — putting  something into the reporter’s own words rather than just parroting them  from another source.  Thus a reporter may say
Celia believed that the man in the room was a woman,
but clearly that does not mean that Celia would use ‘the man in the room’  for who she was thinking about.  So referential terms in the subordinate  proposition are only certainly in the mouth of the reporter, and as a  result only certainly refer to what the reporter means by them.  It is a  short step from this thought to seeing
There was a man in the room, but Celia believed that he was a woman,
as involving a transparent intensional locution, with the same object, as  one might say, ‘inside’ the belief as ‘outside’ in the room.  So it is here  where rigid constant epsilon terms are needed, to symbolise the  cross-sentential anaphor ‘he’, as in:
(∃x)(Mx & Rx) & BcWεx(Mx & Rx).
To understand the matter fully, however, we must make the shift  from meta- to object language we saw at the propositional level above with  truth.  Routley, Meyer and Goddard realised that a rigid semantics required  treating such expressions as ‘BcWx’ as simple predicates, and we must now  see what this implies.  They derived, as we saw before, ‘Routley’s Formula’
L(∃x)Fx → (∃x)LFx,
but we can now start to spell out how this is to be understood, if we hold  to the necessity of identities, i.e. if we use ‘=’ so that
x = y → L(x = y).
Again a clear illustration of the validity of Routley’s Formula is provided  by the number of the planets, but now we may respect the fact that some  things may lack a number, and also the fact that referential, and  attributive senses of terms may be distinguished.  Thus if we write  ‘(nx)Px’ for ‘there are n P’s’, then εn(ny)Py will be the     number of P’s,  and it is what numbers them (i.e. ([εn(ny)Py]x)Px) if they     have a number  (i.e. if (∃n)(nx)Px) — by the epsilon definition of the existential  quantifier.  Then, with ‘Fx’ as the proper (necessary) identity  ‘x = εn(ny)Py’ Routley’s Formula holds because the number in     question  exists eternally, making both sides of the formula true.  But if ‘Fn’ is  simply the attributive ‘(ny)Py’ then this is not necessary, since it is  contingent even, in the first place, that there is a number of P’s, instead  of just some P, making both sides of the formula false.
Hughes and Cresswell argue against the principle saying (Hughes and  Cresswell 1968, p144):
…let [Fx] be ‘x is the number of the planets’.  Then the antecedent is  true, for there must be some number which is the number of the planets  (even if there were no planets at all there would still be such a number,  namely 0): but the consequent is false, for since it is a contingent matter  how many planets there are, there is no number which must be the number of  the planets.
But this forgets continuous quantities, where there are no discrete items  before the nomination of a unit.  The number associated with some planetary  material, for instance, numbers only arbitrary units of that material, and  not the material itself.  So the antecedent of Routley’s Formula is not  necessarily true.
Quine also used the number of the planets in his central argument  against quantification into modal contexts.  He said (Quine 1960,  pp195-197):
If for the sake of argument we accept the term ‘analytic’ as predicable of  sentences (hence as attachable predicatively to quotations or other  singular terms designating sentences), then ‘necessarily’ amounts to ‘is  analytic’ plus an antecedent pair of quotation marks.  For example, the  sentence:
(1) Necessarily 9 > 4
is explained thus:
(2) ‘9 > 4’ is analytic…
So suppose (1) explained as in (2).  Why, one may ask, should we preserve  the operatorial form as of (1), and therewith modal logic, instead of just  leaving matters as in (2)?  An apparent advantage is the possibility of  quantifying into modal positions; for we know we cannot quantify into  quotation, and (2) uses quotation…
But is it more legitimate to quantify into modal positions than into  quotation?  For consider (1) even without regard to (2); surely, on any  plausible interpretation, (1) is true and this is false:
(3) Necessarily the number of major planets > 4.
Since 9 = the number of major planets, we can conclude that the position of  ‘9’ in (1) is not purely referential and hence that the necessity operator  is opaque.
But here Quine does not separate out the referential ‘the number of the  major planets is greater than 4’, i.e. ‘εn(ny)Py > 4’, from     the  attributive ‘There are more than 4 major planets’, i.e. ‘(∃n)((ny)Py &     n >  4)’.  If 9 = εn(ny)Py, then it follows that εn(ny)Py > 4, but it does  not follow that (∃n)((ny)Py & n > 4).  Substitution of identicals in     (1),  therefore, does yield (3), even though it is not necessary that there are  more than 4 major planets.
We can now go into some details of how one gets the ‘x’ in such a  form as ‘LFx’ to be open for quantification.  For, what one finds in  traditional modal semantics (see Hughes and Cresswell 1968, passim) are  formulas in the meta-linguistic style, like
V(Fx, i) = 1,
which say that the valuation put on ‘Fx’ is 1, in world i.  There should be  quotation marks around the ‘Fx’ in such a formula, to make it  meta-linguistic, but by convention they are generally omitted.  To effect  the change to the non-meta-linguistic point of view, we must simply read  this formula as it literally is, so that the ‘Fx’ is in indirect speech  rather than direct speech, and the whole becomes the operator form ‘it  would be true in world i that Fx’.  In this way, the term ‘x’ gets into the  language of the reporter, and the meta/object distinction is not relevant.  Any variable inside the subordinate proposition can now be quantified over,  just like a variable outside it, which means there is ‘quantifying in’, and  indeed all the normal predicate logic operations apply, since all  individual terms are rigid.
A example illustrating this rigidity involves the actual top card  in a pack, and the cards which might have been top card in other  circumstances (see Slater 1988a).  If the actual top card is the Ace of  Spades, and it is supposed that the top card is the Queen of Hearts, then  clearly what would have to be true for those circumstances to obtain would  be for the Ace of Spades to be the Queen of Hearts.  The Ace of Spades is  not in fact the Queen of Hearts, but that does not mean they cannot be  identical in other worlds (c.f. Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, p190).  Certainly if there were several cards people variously thought were on top,  those cards in the various supposed circumstances would not provide a  constant c such that Fc is true in all worlds.  But that is because those  cards are functions of the imagined worlds — the card a believes is top  (εxBaFx) need not be the card b believes is top (εxBbFx), etc.  It  still remains that there is a constant, c, such that Fc is true in all  worlds.  Moreover, that c is not an ‘intensional object’, for the given Ace  of Spades is a plain and solid extensional object, the actual top card  (εxFx).
Routley, Meyer and Goddard did not accept the latter point, wanting  a rigid semantics in terms of ‘intensional objects’ (Goddard and Routley,  1973, p561, Routley, Meyer and Goddard, 1974, p309, see also Hughes and  Cresswell 1968, p197). Stalnaker and Thomason accepted that certain  referential terms could be functional, when discriminating ‘Socrates’ from  ‘Miss America’ — although the functionality of ‘Miss America in year t’ is  significantly different from that of ‘the top card in y’s belief’.  For if  this year’s Miss America is last year’s Miss America, still it is only one  thing which is identical with itself, unlike with the two cards.  Also,  there is nothing which can force this year’s Miss America to be last year’s  different Miss America, in the way that the counterfactuality of the  situation with the playing cards forces two non-identical things in the  actual world to be the same thing in the other possible world.  Other  possible worlds are thus significantly different from other times, and so,  arguably, other possible worlds should not be seen from the Realist  perspective appropriate for other times — or other spaces.
 4. The Epsilon Calculus’ Problematic
It might be said that Realism has delayed a proper logical understanding of many  of these things.  If you look ‘realistically’ at picturesque remarks like  that made before, namely ‘the same object is ‘inside’ the belief as  ‘outside’ in the room’, then it is easy for inappropriate views about the  mind to start to interfere, and make it seem that the same object cannot be  in these two places at once.   But if the mind were something like another  space or time, then counterfactuality could get no proper purchase — no one  could be ‘wrong’, since they would only be talking about elements in their  ‘world’, not any objective, common world.  But really, all that is going on  when one says, for instance,
There was a man in the room, but Celia believed he was a woman,
is that the same term — or one term and a pronominal surrogate for it —  appears at two linguistic places in some discourse, with the same  reference.  Hence there is no grammatical difference between the cross  reference in such an intensional case and the cross reference in a  non-intensional case, such as
There was a man in the room.  He was hungry.
i.e.
(∃x)Mx & HεxMx.
What has been difficult has merely been getting a symbolisation of the  cross-reference in this more elementary kind of case.  But it just involves  extending the epsilon definition of existential statements, using a  reiteration of the substituted epsilon term, as we can see.
It is now widely recognised how the epsilon calculus allows us to  do this (Purdy 1994, Egli and von Heusinger 1995, Meyer Viol 1995, Ch 6),  the theoretical starting point being the theorem about the Russellian  theory of definite descriptions proved before, which breaks up what  otherwise would be a single sentence into a sequential piece of discourse,  enabling the existence and uniqueness clauses to be put in one sentence  while the characterising remark is in another.  The relationship starts to  matter when, in fact, there is no obvious way to formulate a combination of  anaphoric remarks in the predicate calculus, as in, for instance,
There is a king of France.  He is bald,
where there is no uniqueness clause.  This difficulty became a major  problem when logicians started to consider anaphoric reference in the 1960s.
Geach, for instance, in Geach 1962, even believed there could not  be a syllogism of the following kind (Geach 1962, p126):
A man has just drunk a pint of sulphuric acid.
Nobody who drinks a pint of sulphuric acid lives through the day.
So, he won’t live through the day.
He said, one could only draw the conclusion:
Some man who has just drunk a pint of sulphuric acid won’t live  through the day.
Certainly one can only derive
(∃x)(Mx & Dx & ¬Lx)
from
(∃x)(Mx & Dx),
and
(x)(Dx → ¬Lx),
within predicate logic.  But one can still derive
¬Lεx(Mx & Dx),
within the epsilon calculus.
Geach likewise was foxed later when he produced his famous case  (numbered 3 in Geach 1967):
Hob thinks a witch has blighted Bob’s mare, and Nob wonders whether  she (the same witch) killed Cob’s sow,
which is, in epsilon terms
Th(∃x)(Wx & Bxb) & OnKεx(Wx & Bxb)c.
For Geach saw that this could not be (4)
(∃x)(Wx & ThBxb & OnKxc),
or (5)
(∃x)(Th(Wx & Bxb)& OnKxc).
But also a reading of the second clause as (c.f. 18)
Nob wonders whether the witch who blighted Bob’s mare killed Cob’s sow,
in which ‘the witch who blighted Bob’s mare killed Cob’s sow’ is analysed  in the Russellian manner, i.e. as (20)
just one witch blighted Bob’s mare and she killed Cob’s sow,
Geach realised does not catch the specific cross-reference — amongst other  things because of the uniqueness condition which is then introduced.
This difficulty with the uniqueness clause in Russellian analyses  has been widely commented on, although a recent theorist, Neale, has said  that Russell’s theory only needs to be modestly modified: Neale’s main idea  is that, in general, definite descriptions should just be localised to the  context.  His resolution of Geach’s troubling cases thus involves  suggesting that ‘she’, in the above, might simply be ‘the witch we have  been hearing about’ (Neale 1990, p221).  Neale might here have said ‘that  witch who blighted Bob’s mare’, showing that an Hilbertian account of  demonstrative descriptions would have a parallel effect.
A good deal of the ground breaking work on these matters, however,  was done by someone again much influenced by Russell: Evans.  But Evans  significantly broke with Russell over uniqueness (Evans 1977, pp516-517):
One does not want to be committed, by this way of telling the story, to the  existence of a day on which just one man and boy walked along a road.  It  was with this possibility in mind that I stated the requirement for the  appropriate use of an E-type pronoun in terms of having answered, or being  prepared to answer upon demand, the question ‘He? Who?’ or ‘It? Which?’  In order to effect this liberalisation we should allow the reference of the  E-type pronoun to be fixed not only by predicative material explicitly in  the antecedent clause, but also by material which the speaker supplies upon  demand.  This ruling has the effect of making the truth conditions of such  remarks somewhat indeterminate; a determinate proposition will have been  put forward only when the demand has been made and the material supplied.
It was Evans who gave us the title ‘E-type pronoun’ for the ‘he’ in such  expressions as
A Cambridge philosopher smoked a pipe, and he drank a lot of whisky,
i.e., in epsilon terms,
(∃x)(Cx & Px) & Dεx(Cx & Px).
He also insisted (Evans 1977, p516) that what was unique about such  pronouns was that this conjunction of statements was not equivalent to
A Cambridge philosopher, who smoked a pipe, drank a lot of whisky,
i.e.
(∃x)(Cx & Px & Dx).
Clearly the epsilon account is entirely in line with this, since it  illustrates the point made before about cases without a uniqueness clause.  Only the second expression, which contains a relative pronoun, is  formalisable in the predicate calculus.  To formalise the first expression,  which contains a personal pronoun, one at least needs something with the  expressive capabilities of the epsilon calculus.
 5. The Formal Semantics of Epsilon Terms
The semantics of epsilon terms is nowadays more general, but the first  interpretations of epsilon terms were restricted to arithmetical cases, and  specifically took epsilon to be the least number operator.  Hilbert and  Bernays developed Arithmetic using the epsilon calculus, using the further  epsilon axiom schema (Hilbert and Bernays 1970, Book 2, p85f, c.f.  Leisenring 1969, p92) :
(εxAx = st) → ¬At,
where ‘s’ is intended to be the successor function, and ‘t’ is any numeral.  This constrains the interpretation of the epsilon symbol, but the least  number interpretation is not strictly forced, since the axiom only ensures  that no number having the property A immediately precedes εxAx.
The new axiom, however, is sufficient to prove mathematical  induction, in the form:
(A0 & (x)(Ax → Asx)) → (x)Ax.
For assume the reverse, namely
A0 & (x)(Ax → Asx) & ¬(x)Ax,
and consider what happens when the term ‘εx¬Ax’ is     substituted in
t = 0 ∨ t = sn,
which is derivable from the other axioms of number theory which Hilbert and  Bernays are using.  If we had
εx¬Ax = 0,
then, since it is given that A0, then we would have Aεx¬Ax.      But since,  by the definition of the universal quantifier,
Aεx¬Ax ↔ (x)Ax,
we know, because ¬(x)Ax is also given, that ¬Aεx¬Ax, which     means we  cannot have εx¬Ax = 0.  Hence we must have the other     alternative, i.e.
εx¬Ax = sn,
for some n.  But from the new axiom
(εx¬Ax = sn) → An,
hence we must have An, although we must also have
An → Asn,
because (x)(Ax → Asx).  All together that   requires Aεx¬Ax again,  which is impossible.  Hence the further epsilon axiom is sufficient to  establish the given principle of induction.
The more general link between epsilon terms and choice functions  was first set out by Asser, although Asser’s semantics for an elementary  epsilon calculus without the second epsilon axiom makes epsilon terms  denote rather complex choice functions.  Wilfrid Meyer Viol, calling an  epsilon calculus without the second axiom an ‘intensional’ epsilon  calculus, makes the epsilon terms in such a calculus instead name Skolem  functions.  Skolem functions are also called Herbrand functions, although  they arise in a different way, namely in Skolem’s Theorem.  Skolem’s  Theorem states that, if a formula in prenex normal form is provable in the  predicate calculus, then a certain corresponding formula, with the  existential quantifiers removed, is provable in a predicate calculus  enriched with function symbols.  The functions symbolised are called Skolem  functions, although, in another context, they would be Herbrand functions.
Skolem’s Theorem is a meta-logical theorem, about the relation  between two logical calculi, but a non-metalogical version is in fact  provable in the epsilon calculus from which Skolem’s actual theorem  follows, since, for example, we can get, by the epsilon definition, now of  the existential quantifier
(x)(∃y)Fxy ↔ (x)FxεyFxy.
As a result, if the left hand side of such an equivalence is provable in an  epsilon calculus the right hand side is provable there.  But the left hand  side is provable in an epsilon calculus if it is provable in the predicate  calculus, by the Second Epsilon Theorem; and if the right hand side is  provable in an epsilon calculus it is provable in a predicate calculus  enriched with certain function symbols —  epsilon terms, like ‘εyFxy’.  So, by generalisation, we get Skolem’s original result.
When we add to an intensional epsilon calculus the second epsilon axiom
(x)(Fx ↔ Gx) →εxFx = εxGx,
the interpretation of epsilon terms is commonly extensional, i.e. in terms  of sets, since two predicates ‘F’ and ‘G’ satisfying the antecedent of this  second axiom will determine the same set — if they determine sets at all,  that is.  For that requires the predicates to be collectivisantes, in  Bourbaki’s terms, as with explicit set membership statements, like ‘x   ∈ y’.  In such a case the epsilon term ‘εx(x ∈ y)’ designates a  choice function, i.e. a function which selects one from a given set (c.f.  Leisenring 1969, p19, Meyer Viol 1995, p42).  In the case where there are  no members of the set the selection is arbitrary, although for all empty  sets it is invariably the same.  Thus the second axiom validates, for  example, Kalish and Montague’s rule for this case, which they put in the  form
εxFx = εx¬(x = x).
Kalish and Montague in fact prove a version of the second epsilon axiom in  their system (Kalish and Montague 1964, see T407, p256).  The second axiom  also holds in Hermes’ system (Hermes 1965), although there one in addition  finds a third epsilon axiom,
εx¬(x = x) = εx(x = x),
for which there would seem to be no real justification.
But the second epsilon axiom itself is curious.  One questionable  thing about it is that both Leisenring and Meyer Viol do not state that the  predicates in question must determine sets before their choice function  semantics can apply.  That the predicates are collectivisantes is merely  presumed in their theories, since ‘εxBx’ is invariably     modelled by means  of a choice from the presumed set of things which in the model are B.  Certainly there is a special clause dealing with the empty set; but there  is no consideration of the case where some things are B although those  things are not discrete, as with the things which are red, for instance.  If the predicate in question is not a count noun then there is no set of  things involved, since with mass terms, and continuous quantities there are  no given elements to be counted (c.f. Bunt 1985, pp262-263 in particular).  Of course numbers can still be associated with them, but only given an  arbitrary unit.  With the cows in a field, for instance, we can associate a  determinate number, but with the beef there we cannot, unless we consider,  say, the number of pounds of it.
The point, as we saw before, has a formalisation in epsilon terms.  Thus if we write ‘(nx)Fx’, for ‘there are n F’s’, then εn(ny)Fy will be  the number of F’s, and it is what numbers them if they have a number.  But  in the reverse case the previously mentioned arbitrariness of the epsilon  term comes in.  For if ¬(∃n)(nx)Fx, then ¬([εn(ny)Fy]x)Fx, and so,  although an arbitrary number exists, it does not number the F’s.  In that  case, in other words, we do not have a number of F’s, merely some F.
In fact, even when there is a set of things, the second epsilon  axiom, as stated above, does not apply in general, since there are  intensional differences between properties to consider, as in, for instance  ‘There is a red-haired man, and a Caucasian in the room, and they are  different’.  Here, if there were only red-haired Caucasians in the room,  then with the above second axiom, we could not find epsilon substitutions  to differentiate the two individuals involved.  This may remind us that it  is necessary co-extensionality, and not just contingent co-extensionality  which is the normal criterion for the identity of properties (c.f. Hughes  and Cresswell 1968, pp209-210).  So it leads us to see the appropriateness  of a modalised second axiom, which uses just an intensional version of the  antecedent of the previous second epsilon axiom, in which ‘L’ means ‘it is  necessary that’, namely:
L(x)(Fx ↔ Gx) →εxFx = εxGx.
For with this axiom only the co-extensionalities which are necessary will  produce identities between the associated epsilon terms.  We can only get,  for instance,
εxPx = εx(Px ∨ Px),
and
εxFx = εyFy,
and all other identities derivable in a similar way.
However, the original second epsilon axiom is then provable, in the  special case where the predicates express set membership.  For if  necessarily
(x)(x ∈ y ↔ x ∈ z) ↔ y = z,
while necessarily
y = z ↔ L(y = z),
(see Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, p190) then
L(x)(x ∈ y ↔ x ∈ z) ↔ (x)(x ∈ y  ↔ x ∈ z),
and so, from the modalised second axiom we can get
(x)(x ∈ y ↔ x ∈ z) →εx(x ∈ y) =  εx(x ∈ z).
Note, however, that if one only has contingently
(x)(Fx ↔ x ∈ z),
then one cannot get, on this basis,
εxFx = εx(x ∈ z).
But this is something which is desirable, as well.  For we have seen that  it is contingent that the number of the planets does number the planets —  because it is not necessary that ([εn(ny)Py]x)Px.  This makes     ‘(9x)Px’  contingent, even though the identity ‘9 = εn(nx)Px’ remains     necessary.  But also it is contingent that there is the set of planets, p, which there  is, since while, say,
(x)(x ∈ p ↔ Px),
where
εn(nx)(x ∈ p) = εn(nx)Px = 9,
it is still possible that, in some other possible world,
(x)(x ∈ p’ ↔ Px),
with p’ the set of planets there, and
¬(εn(nx)(x ∈ p’) = 9).
We could not have this further contingency, however, if the original second  epsilon axiom held universally.
It is on this fuller basis that we can continue to hold ‘x = y → L(x = y)’, i.e. the invariable necessity of identity — one merely  distinguishes ‘(9x)Px’ from ‘9 = εx(nx)Px’, and from ‘9 = εx(nx)(x   ∈ p)’, as above.
Adding the original second epsilon axiom to an intensional epsilon  calculus is therefore acceptable only if all the predicates are about set  membership.  This is not an uncommon assumption, indeed it is pervasive in  the usually given semantics for predicate logic, for instance.  But if, by  contrast, we want to allow for the fact that not all predicates are  collectivisantes then we should take just the first epsilon axiom with  merely a modalised version of the second epsilon axiom.  The interpretation  of epsilon terms is then always in terms of Skolem functions, although if  we are dealing with the membership of sets, those Skolem functions  naturally are choice functions.
6. Some Metatheory
To finish we shall briefly look, as promised, at some meta-theory.
The epsilon calculi that were first described were not very  convenient to use, and Hilbert and Bernays’ proofs of the First and Second  Epsilon Theorems were very complex.  This was because the presentation was  axiomatic, however, and with the development of other means of presenting  the same logics we get more readily available meta-logical results.  I will  indicate some of the early difficulties before showing how these theorems  can be proved, nowadays, much more simply.
The problem with proving the Second Epsilon Theorem, on an  axiomatic basis, is that complex, and non-constant epsilon terms may enter  a proof in the epsilon calculus by means of substitutions into the axioms.  What has to be proved is that an epsilon calculus proof of an epsilon-free  theorem (i.e. one which can be expressed just in predicate calculus  language) can be replaced by a predicate calculus proof.  So some analysis  of complex epsilon terms is required, to show that they can be eliminated  in the relevant cases, leaving only constant epsilon terms, which are  sufficiently similar to the individual symbols in standard predicate logic.  Hilbert and Bernays (Hilbert and Bernays 1970, Book 2, p23f) say that one  epsilon term ‘εxFx’ is subordinate to another ‘εyGy’ if and only if ‘G’  contains ‘εxFx’, and a free occurrence of the variable ‘y’     lies within  ‘εxFx’.  For instance ‘εxRxy’ is a complex, and non-constant epsilon  term, which is subordinate to ‘εySyεxRyx’.  Hilbert and Bernays then  define the rank of an epsilon term to be 1 if there are no epsilon terms  subordinate to it, and otherwise to be one greater than the maximal rank of  the epsilon terms which are subordinate to it.  Using the same general  ideas, Leisenring proves two theorems (Leisenring 1969, p72f).  First he  proves a rank reduction theorem, which shows that epsilon proofs of  epsilon-free formulas in which the second epsilon axiom is not used, but in  which every term is of rank less than or equal to r, may be replaced by  epsilon proofs in which every term is of rank less than or equal to r – 1.  Then he proves the eliminability of the second epsilon axiom in proofs of  epsilon-free formulas.  Together, these two theorems show that if there is  an epsilon proof of an epsilon-free formula, then there is such a proof not  using the second epsilon axiom, and in which all epsilon terms have rank  just 1.  Even though such epsilon terms might still contain free variables,  if one replaces those that do with a fixed symbol ‘a’ (starting with those  of maximal length) that reduces the proof to one in what is called the  ‘epsilon star’ system, in which there are only constant epsilon terms  (Leisenring 1969, p66f).  Leisenring shows that proofs in the epsilon star  system can be turned into proofs in the predicate calculus, by replacing  the epsilon terms by individual symbols.
But, as was said before, there is now available a much shorter  proof of the Second Epsilon Theorem.  In fact there are several, but I  shall just indicate one, which arises simply by modifying the predicate  calculus truth trees, as found in, for instance, Jeffrey (see Jeffrey  1967). Jeffrey uses the standard propositional truth tree rules, together  with the rules of quantifier interchange, which remain unaffected, and  which are not material to the present purpose.  He also has, however, a  rule of existential quantifier elimination,
(∃x)Fx ├ Fa,
in which ‘a’ must be new, and a rule of universal quantifier elimination
(x)Fx ├ Fb,
in which ‘b’ must be old — unless no other individual terms are available.  By reducing closed formulas of the form ‘P & ¬C’ to absurdity Jeffrey can  then prove ‘P → C’, and validate ‘P ├ C’ in his calculus.  But clearly, upon adding epsilon terms to the language, the first of these  rules must be changed to
(∃x)Fx ├ FεxFx,
while also the second rule can be replaced by the pair
(x)Fx ├ Fεx¬Fx,
Fεx¬Fx ├ Fa,
(where ‘a’ is old) to produce an appropriate proof procedure.  Steen reads  ‘εx¬Fx’ as ‘the most un-F-like thing’ (Steen 1972, p162),     which explains  why Fεx¬Fx entails Fa, since if the most un-F-like thing is in     fact F,  then the most plausible counter-example to the generalisation is in fact  not so, making the generalisation exceptionless.  But there is a more  important reason why the rule of universal quantifier elimination is best  broken up into two parts.
For Jeffrey’s rules only allow him ‘limited upward correctness’  (Jeffrey 1967, p167), since Jeffrey has to say, with respect to his  universal quantifier elimination rule, that the range of the quantification  there be limited merely to the universe of discourse of the path below.  This is because, if an initial sentence is false in a valuation so also  must be one of its conclusions.  But the first epsilon rule which replaces  Jeffrey’s rule ensures, instead, that there is ‘total upwards correctness’.  For if it is false that everything is F then, without any special  interpretation of the quantifier, one of the given consequences of the  universal statement is false, namely the immediate one — since Fεx¬Fx is  in fact equivalent to (x)Fx.  A similar improvement also arises with the  existential quantifier elimination rule.  For Jeffrey can only get ‘limited  downwards correctness’, with his existential quantifier elimination rule  (Jeffrey 1967, p165), since it is not an entailment.  In fact, in order to  show that if an initial sentence is true in a valuation so is one of its  conclusions, in this case, Jeffrey has to stretch his notion of ‘truth’ to  being true either in the given valuation, or some nominal variant of it.
The epsilon rule which replaces Jeffrey’s overcomes this difficulty by not  employing names, only demonstrative descriptions, and by being, as a  result, totally downward correct.  For if there is an F then that F is F,  whatever name is used to refer to it.  The epsilon calculus terminology  thus precedes any naming: it gets hold of the more primitive, demonstrative  way we have of referring to objects, using phrases like ‘that F’.  Thus in  explication of the predicate calculus rule we might well have said
suppose there is an F, well, call that F ‘a’, then Fa,
but that requires we understand ‘that F’ before we come to use ‘a’.
So how does the Second Epsilon Theorem follow?  This theorem, as  before, states that an epsilon calculus proof of an epsilon-free theorem  may be replaced by a predicate calculus proof of the same formula.  But the  transformation required in the present setting is now evident: simply  change to new names all epsilon terms introduced in the epsilon calculus  quantifier elimination rules.  This covers both the new names in Jeffrey’s  first rule, but also the odd case where there are no old names in Jeffrey’s  second rule.  The epsilon calculus proofs invariably use constant epsilon  terms, and are thus effectively in Leisenring’s epsilon star system.
Epsilon terms which are non-constant, however, crucially enter the  proof of the First Epsilon Theorem.  The First Epsilon Theorem states that  if C is a provable predicate calculus formula, in prenex normal form, i.e.  with all quantifiers at the front, then a finite disjunction of instances  of C’s matrix is provable in the epsilon calculus.  The crucial fact is  that the epsilon calculus gives us access to Herbrand  functions, which arise when universal quantifiers are eliminated from  formulas using their epsilon definition.  Thus
(∃y)(x)¬Fyx,
for instance, is equivalent to
(∃y)¬Fyεx¬¬Fyx,
and so
(∃y)¬FyεxFyx,
and the resulting epsilon term ‘εxFyx’ is a Herbrand     function.
Using such reductions, all universal quantifiers can evidently be  removed from formulas in prenex normal form, and the additional fact that,  in a certain specific way, the remaining existential quantifiers are  disjunctions makes all predicate calculus formulas equivalent to  disjunctions.  Remember that a formula is provable if its negation is  reducible to absurdity, which means that its truth tree must close.  But,  by König’s Lemma, if there is no open path through a truth tree then there  is some finite stage at which there is no open path, so, in the case above,  for instance, if no valuation makes the last formula’s negation true, then  the tree of the instances of that negative statement must close in a finite  length.  But the negative statement is the universal formula
(y)FyεxFyx,
by the rules of quantifier interchange, so a finite conjunction of  instances of the matrix of this universal formula, namely Fyx, must reduce  to absurdity.  For the rules of universal quantifier elimination only  produce consequences with the form of this matrix.  By de Morgan’s Laws,  that makes necessary a finite disjunction of instances of ¬Fyx.   By  generalisation we thus get the First Epsilon Theorem.
The epsilon calculus, however, can take us further than the First  Epsilon Theorem.  Indeed, one has to take care with the impression this  theorem may give that existential statements are just equivalent to  disjunctions.  If that were the case, then existential statements would be  unlike individual statements, saying not that one specified thing has a  certain property, but merely that one of a certain group of things has a  certain property.  The group in question is normally called the ‘domain’ of  the quantification, and this, it seems, has to be specified when setting  out the semantics of quantifiers.  But study of  the epsilon calculus shows  that there is no need for such ‘domains’, or indeed for such semantics.  This is because the example above, for instance, is also equivalent to
¬FaεzFaz,
where a = εy¬FεxFyx.  So the previous disjunction of instances of ¬Fyx  is in fact only true because this specific disjunct is true.  The First  Epsilon Theorem, it must be remembered, does not prove that an existential  statement is equivalent to a certain disjunction; it shows merely that an  existential statement is provable if and only if a certain disjunction is  provable.  And what is also provable, in such a case, is a statement merely  about one object.  Indeed the existential statement is provably equivalent  to it.  It is this fact which supports the epsilon definition of the  quantifiers; and it is what permits anaphoric reference to the same object  by means of the same epsilon term.  An existential statement is thus just  another statement about an individual — merely a nameless one.
The reverse point goes for the universal quantifier: a universal  statement is not the conjunction of its instances, even though it implies  them.  A generalisation is simply equivalent to one of its instances — to  the one involving the prime putative exception to it, as we have seen.  Not  being able to specify that prime putative exception leaves Jeffrey saying  that if a generalisation is false then one of its instances is false  without any way of ensuring that that instance has been drawn as a  conclusion below it in the truth tree except by limiting the interpretation  of the generalisation just to the universe of discourse of the path.  It  thus seems necessary, within the predicate calculus, that there be a  ‘model’ for the quantifiers which restricts them to a certain ‘domain’,  which means that they do not necessarily range over everything.  But in the  epsilon calculus the quantifiers do, invariably, range over everything, and  so there is no need to specify their range.
7. References and Further Reading

Ackermann, W. 1937-8, ‘Mengentheoretische Begründung der Logik’,  Mathematische Annalen, 115, 1-22.
Asser, G.  1957, ‘Theorie der Logischen Auswahlfunktionen’, Zeitschrift für  Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik, 3, 30-68.
Bernays, P. 1958, Axiomatic Set Theory, North Holland, Dordrecht.
Bertolet, R. 1980, ‘The Semantic Significance of Donnellan’s Distinction’,  Philosophical Studies, 37, 281-288.
Bourbaki, N. 1954, Éléments de Mathématique,    Hermann, Paris.
Bunt, H.C. 1985, Mass Terms and Model-Theoretic Semantics, C.U.P.,   Cambridge.
Church, A. 1940, ‘A Formulation of the Simple Theory of Types’, Journal of  Symbolic Logic, 5, 56-68.
Copi, I. 1973, Symbolic Logic, 4th ed. Macmillan, New York.
Devitt, M. 1974, ‘Singular Terms’, The Journal of Philosophy, 71, 183-205.
Donnellan, K. 1966, ‘Reference and Definite Descriptions’, Philosophical  Review, 75, 281-304.
Egli, U. and von Heusinger, K. 1995, ‘The Epsilon Operator and E-Type  Pronouns’ in U. Egli et al. (eds.), Lexical Knowledge in the Organisation of  Language, Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Evans, G. 1977, ‘Pronouns, Quantifiers and Relative Clauses’, Canadian  Journal of Philosophy, 7, 467-536.
Geach, P.T. 1962, Reference and Generality, Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Geach, P.T. 1967, ‘Intentional Identity’, The Journal of Philosophy, 64,  627-632.
Goddard, L. and Routley, R. 1973, The Logic of Significance and Context,  Scottish Academic Press, Aberdeen.
Gödel, K. 1969, ‘An Interpretation of the Intuitionistic Sentential  Calculus’, in J. Hintikka (ed.), The Philosophy of Mathematics, O.U.P.  Oxford.
Hazen, A. 1987, ‘Natural Deduction and Hilbert’s ε-operator’, Journal of  Philosophical Logic, 16, 411-421.
Hermes, H. 1965, Eine Termlogik mit Auswahloperator, Springer   Verlag, Berlin.
Hilbert, D. 1923, ‘Die Logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik’, Mathematische  Annalen, 88, 151-165.
Hilbert, D. 1925, ‘On the Infinite’ in J. van Heijenhoort (ed.), From Frege  to Gödel, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
Hilbert, D. and Bernays, P. 1970, Grundlagen der Mathematik, 2nd ed.,  Springer, Berlin.
Hughes, G.E. and Cresswell, M.J. 1968, An Introduction to Modal Logic,  Methuen, London.
Jeffrey, R. 1967, Formal Logic: Its Scope and Limits, 1st Ed. McGraw-Hill,  New York.
Kalish, D. and Montague, R. 1964, Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning,  Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc, New York.
Kneebone, G.T. 1963, Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics,  Van Nostrand, Dordrecht.
Leisenring, A.C. 1969, Mathematical Logic and Hilbert’s ε-symbol,  Macdonald, London.
Marciszewski, W. 1981, Dictionary of Logic, Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague.
Meyer Viol, W.P.M. 1995, Instantial Logic, ILLC Dissertation Series  1995-11, Amsterdam.
Montague, R. 1963, ‘Syntactical Treatments of Modality, with Corollaries on  Reflection Principles and Finite Axiomatisability’, Acta Philosophica  Fennica, 16, 155-167.
Neale, S. 1990, Descriptions, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Priest, G.G. 1984, ‘Semantic Closure’, Studia Logica, XLIII 1/2, 117-129.
Prior, A.N., 1971, Objects of Thought, O.U.P. Oxford.
Purdy, W.C.  1994, ‘A Variable-Free Logic for Anaphora’ in P. Humphreys  (ed.) Patrick Suppes: Scientific Philosopher, Vol 3, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  41-70.
Quine, W.V.O. 1960, Word and Object, Wiley, New York.
Rasiowa, H. 1956, ‘On the ε-theorems’, Fundamenta     Mathematicae, 43, 156-165.
Rosser, J. B. 1953, Logic for Mathematicians, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Routley, R. 1969, ‘A Simple Natural Deduction System’, Logique et Analyse,  12, 129-152.
Routley, R. 1977, ‘Choice and Descriptions in Enriched Intensional  Languages II, and III’, in E. Morscher, J. Czermak, and P. Weingartner  (eds), Problems in Logic and Ontology, Akademische Druck und Velagsanstalt,  Graz.
Routley, R. 1980, Exploring Meinong’s Jungle, Departmental Monograph #3,  Philosophy Department, R.S.S.S., A.N.U. Canberra.
Routley, R., Meyer, R. and Goddard, L. 1974, ‘Choice and Descriptions in  Enriched Intensional Languages I’, Journal of Philosophical Logic, 3,  291-316.
Russell, B. 1905, ‘On Denoting’ Mind, 14, 479-493.
Sayward, C. 1987, ‘Prior’s Theory of Truth’ Analysis, 47, 83-87.
Slater, B.H. 1986(a), ‘E-type Pronouns and ε-terms’,     Canadian Journal of  Philosophy, 16, 27-38.
Slater, B.H. 1986(b), ‘Prior’s Analytic’, Analysis, 46, 76-81.
Slater, B.H. 1988(a), ‘Intensional Identities’, Logique et Analyse, 121-2,  93-107.
Slater, B.H. 1988(b), ‘Hilbertian Reference’, Noûs, 22, 283-97.
Slater, B.H. 1989(a), ‘Modal Semantics’, Logique et Analyse, 127-8, 195-209.
Slater, B.H. 1990, ‘Using Hilbert’s Calculus’, Logique et Analyse, 129-130,  45-67.
Slater, B.H. 1992(a), ‘Routley’s Formulation of Transparency’, History and  Philosophy of Logic, 13, 215-24.
Slater, B.H. 1994(a), ‘The Epsilon Calculus’ Problematic’, Philosophical  Papers, XXIII, 217-42.
Steen, S.W.P. 1972, Mathematical Logic, C.U.P. Cambridge.
Thomason, R. 1977, ‘Indirect Discourse is not Quotational’, Monist, 60,  340-354.
Thomason, R. 1980, ‘A Note on Syntactical Treatments of Modality’,  Synthese, 44, 391-395.
Thomason, R.H. and Stalnaker, R.C. 1968, ‘Modality and Reference’, Noûs, 2,  359-372.

Author Information
Barry Hartley Slater
Email: slaterbh@cyllene.uwa.edu.au
University of Western Australia
Australia





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







