








Legal Positivism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Legal Positivism
Legal positivism is a philosophy of law that emphasizes the conventional nature of law—that it is socially constructed. According to legal positivism, law is synonymous with positive norms, that is, norms made by the legislator or considered as common law or case law. Formal criteria of law’s origin, law enforcement and legal effectiveness are all sufficient for social norms to be considered law.  Legal positivism does not base law on divine commandments, reason, or human rights.  As an historical matter, positivism arose in opposition to classical natural law theory, according to which there are necessary moral constraints on the content of law.
Legal positivism does not imply an ethical justification for the content of the law, nor a decision for or against the obedience to law. Positivists do not judge laws by questions of justice or humanity, but merely by the ways in which the laws have been created. This includes the view that judges make new law in deciding cases not falling clearly under a legal rule. Practicing, deciding or tolerating certain practices of law can each be considered a way of creating law.
Within legal doctrine, legal positivism would be opposed to sociological jurisprudence and hermeneutics of law, which study the concrete prevailing circumstances of statutory interpretation in society.
The word “positivism” was probably first used to draw attention to the idea that law is “positive” or “posited,” as opposed to being “natural” in the sense of being derived from natural law or morality.
Table of Contents

 The Pedigree Thesis 
 The Separability Thesis 

 Inclusive vs. Exclusive Positivism 


 The Discretion Thesis 
 Classic Criticisms of Positivism 

 Fuller’s Internal Morality of Law 
 Positivism and Legal Principles 
 The Semantic Sting 


 References and Further Reading

 1. The Pedigree Thesis
The pedigree thesis asserts that legal  validity is a function of certain social facts.  Borrowing heavily from  Jeremy Bentham, John Austin argues that the principal distinguishing  feature of a legal system is the presence of a sovereign who is habitually  obeyed by most people in the society, but not in the habit of obeying any  determinate human superior (Austin 1995, p. 166). On Austin’s view, a rule  R is legally valid (that is, is a law) in a society S if and only if R is  commanded by the sovereign in S and is backed up with the threat of a  sanction.  The severity of the threatened sanction is irrelevant; any  general sovereign imperative supported by a threat of even the smallest  harm is a law.
Austin’s command theory of law is vulnerable to a number of  criticisms.   One problem is that there appears to be no identifiable sovereign in  democratic societies.  In the United States, for example, the ultimate  political power seems to belong to the people, who elect lawmakers to  represent their interests.   Elected lawmakers have the power to coerce  behavior but are regarded as servants of the people and not as  repositories  of sovereign power.  The voting population, on the other hand, seems to be  the repository of ultimate political authority yet lacks the immediate  power to coerce behavior.  Thus, in democracies like that of the United  States, the ultimate political authority and the power to coerce behavior  seem to reside in different entities.
A second problem has to do with Austin’s view that the sovereign  lawmaking authority is incapable of legal limitation.  On Austin’s view, a  sovereign cannot be legally constrained because no person (or body of  persons) can coerce herself (or itself).  Since constitutional provisions  limit the authority of the legislative body to make laws, Austin is forced  to argue that what we refer to as constitutional law is really not law at  all; rather, it is principally a matter of “positive morality” (Austin  1977, p. 107).
Austin’s view is difficult to reconcile with constitutional law in the  United States.  Courts regard the procedural and substantive provisions of  the constitution as constraints on legal validity.  The Supreme Court has  held, for example, that “an unconstitutional act is not a law; it confers  no rights; it imposes no duties; it is, in legal contemplation, as  inoperative as though it had never been passed.”  (Norton v. Shelby  County, 118 U.S. 425 (1886)).  Moreover, these constraints purport to  be legal constraints: the Supremacy Clause of Article VI of the  Constitution states that “[t]his Constitution … shall be the supreme  Law of the Land; and the Judges in every State shall be bound  thereby.”
The most influential criticisms of Austin’s version of the pedigree  thesis, however, owe to H. L. A. Hart’s seminal work, The Concept of  Law.  Hart points out that Austin’s theory provides, at best, a  partial  account of legal validity because it focuses on one kind of rule, namely  that which requires citizens “to do or abstain from certain actions,  whether they wish to or not” (Hart 1994, p. 81).  While every legal system  must contain so-called primary rules that regulate citizen behavior, Hart  believes a system consisting entirely of the kind of liberty restrictions  found in the criminal law is, at best, a rudimentary or primitive legal  system.
On Hart’s view, Austin’s emphasis on coercive force leads him to  overlook the presence of a second kind of primary rule that confers upon  citizens the power to create, modify, and extinguish rights and  obligations  in other persons.  As Hart points out, the rules governing the creation of  contracts and wills cannot plausibly be characterized as restrictions on  freedom that are backed by the threat of a sanction.  These rules empower  persons to structure their legal relations within the coercive framework  of  the law-a feature that Hart correctly regards as one of “law’s greatest  contributions to social life.”  The operation of power-conferring primary  rules, according to Hart, indicates the presence of a more sophisticated  system for regulating behavior.
But what ultimately distinguishes societies with full-blown systems of  law from those with only rudimentary or primitive forms of law is that the  former have, in addition to first-order primary rules, secondary  meta-rules  that have as their subject matter the primary rules themselves:
[Secondary rules] may all be said to be on a different level  from the primary rules, for they are all about such rules; in the  sense that while primary rules are concerned with the actions that  individuals must or must not do, these secondary rules are all concerned  with the primary rules themselves.  They specify the way in which the  primary rules may be conclusively ascertained, introduced, eliminated,  varied, and the fact of their violation conclusively determined (Hart  1994,  p. 92).
Hart distinguishes three types of secondary rules that mark the  transition from primitive forms of law to full-blown legal systems: (1)  the  rule of recognition, which “specif[ies] some feature or features  possession  of which by a suggested rule is taken as a conclusive affirmative  indication that it is a rule of the group to be supported by the social  pressure it exerts” (Hart 1994, p. 92); (2) the rule of change, which  enables a society to add, remove, and modify valid rules; and (3) the rule  of adjudication, which provides a mechanism for determining whether a  valid  rule has been violated.  On Hart’s view, then, every society with a  full-blown legal system necessarily has a rule of recognition that  articulates criteria for legal validity that include provisions for  making,  changing and adjudicating law.  Law is, to use Hart’s famous phrase, “the  union of primary and secondary rules” (Hart 1994, p. 107).  Austin theory  fails, on Hart’s view, because it fails to acknowledge the importance of  secondary rules in manufacturing legal validity.
Hart also finds fault with Austin’s view that legal obligation is  essentially coercive.  According to Hart, there is no difference between  the Austinian sovereign who governs by coercing behavior and the gunman  who  orders someone to hand over her money.  In both cases, the subject can  plausibly be characterized as being “obliged” to comply with the  commands,  but not as being “duty-bound” or “obligated” to do so (Hart 1994, p. 80).   On Hart’s view, the application of coercive force alone can never give  rise  to an obligation-legal or otherwise.
Legal rules are obligatory, according to Hart, because people accept  them as standards that justify criticism and, in extreme cases, punishment  of deviations:
What is necessary is that there should be a critical  reflective  attitude to certain patterns of behavior as a common standard, and that  this should display itself in criticism (including self-criticism),  demands  for conformity, and in acknowledgements that such criticism and demands  are  justified, all of which find their characteristic expression in the  normative terminology of ‘ought’, ‘must’, and ‘should’, and ‘right’ and  ‘wrong’ (Hart 1994, p. 56).
The subject who reflectively accepts the rule as providing a standard that  justifies criticism of deviations is said to take “the internal point of  view” towards it.
On Hart’s view, it would be too much to require that the bulk of the  population accept the rule of recognition as the ultimate criteria for  legal validity: “the reality of the situation is that a great proportion  of  ordinary citizens-perhaps a majority-have no general conception of the  legal structure or its criteria of validity” (Hart 1994, p. 111).  Instead,  Hart argues that what is necessary to the existence of a legal system is  that the majority of officials take the internal point of view towards the  rule of recognition and its criteria of validity.  All that is required of  citizens is that they generally obey the primary rules that are legally  valid according to the rule of recognition.
Thus, on Hart’s view, there are two minimum conditions sufficient and  necessary for the existence of a legal system: “On the one hand those  rules  of behavior which are valid according to the system’s ultimate criteria  of  validity must be generally obeyed, and, on the other hand, its rules of  recognition specifying the criteria of legal validity and its rules of  change and adjudication must be effectively accepted as common public  standards of official behavior by its officials” (Hart 1994, p. 113).
Hart’s view is vulnerable to the same criticism that he levels against  Austin.  Hart rejects Austin’s view because the institutional application  of coercive force can no more give rise to an obligation than can the  application of coercive force by a gunman.  But the situation is no  different if the gunman takes the internal point of view towards his  authority to make such a threat.  Despite the gunman’s belief that he is  entitled to make the threat, the victim is obliged, but not obligated, to  comply with the gunman’s orders.  The gunman’s behavior is no less  coercive  because he believes he is entitled to make the threat.
Similarly, in the minimal legal system, only the officials of  the  legal system take the internal point of view towards the rule of  recognition that endows them with authority to make, execute, adjudicate,  and enforce the rules.  The mere presence of a belief in the officials  that  they are entitled to make law cannot give rise to an obligation in other  people to comply with their enactments any more than the presence of a  belief on the part of a gunman that he is entitled to issue orders gives  rise to an obligation in the victim to comply with those orders.  Hart’s  minimal legal system is no less coercive than Austin’s legal system.
 2. The Separability Thesis
The second thesis comprising the  foundation of legal positivism is the separability thesis.  In its most  general form, the separability thesis asserts that law and morality are  conceptually distinct.  This abstract formulation can be interpreted in a  number of ways.  For example, Klaus Faber (1996) interprets it as making a  meta-level claim that the definition of law must be entirely free of moral  notions.  This interpretation implies that any reference to moral  considerations in defining the related notions of law, legal validity, and  legal system is inconsistent with the separability thesis.
More commonly, the separability thesis is interpreted as making only  an  object-level claim about the existence conditions for legal validity.  As  H.L.A. Hart describes it, the separability thesis is no more than the  “simple contention that it is in no sense a necessary truth that laws  reproduce or satisfy certain demands of morality, though in fact they have  often done so” (Hart 1994, pp. 181-82).  Insofar as the object-level  interpretation of the separability thesis denies it is a necessary truth  that there are moral constraints on legal validity, it implies the  existence of a possible legal system in which there are no moral  constraints on legal validity.
 a. Inclusive vs. Exclusive Positivism
Though all positivists agree there are possible legal systems without  moral constraints on legal validity, there are conflicting views on  whether  there are possible legal systems with such constraints.  According to  inclusive positivism (also known as incorporationism and soft positivism),  it is possible for a society’s rule of recognition to incorporate moral  constraints on the content of law.  Prominent inclusive positivists  include  Jules Coleman and H.L.A. Hart, who maintains that “the rule of recognition  may incorporate as criteria of legal validity conformity with moral  principles or substantive values … such as the Sixteenth or Nineteenth  Amendments to the United States Constitution respecting the  establishment  of religion or abridgements of the right to vote” (Hart 1994, p. 250).
In contrast, exclusive positivism (also called hard positivism) denies  that a legal system can incorporate moral constraints on legal validity.   Exclusive positivists like Joseph Raz (1979, p. 47) subscribe to the  source  thesis, according to which the existence and content of law can always be  determined by reference to its sources without recourse to moral argument.   On this view, the sources of law include both the circumstances of its  promulgation and relevant interpretative materials, such as court cases  involving its application.
At first glance, exclusive positivism may seem difficult to reconcile  with what appear to be moral criteria of legal validity in legal systems  like that of the United States.  For example, the Fourth Amendment  provides  that “[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses,  papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not  be violated.”  Likewise, the First Amendment prohibits laws abridging the  right of free speech.  Taken at face value, these amendments seem to  make  moral standards part of the conditions for legal validity.
Exclusive positivists argue that such amendments can require judges  to  consider moral standards in certain circumstances, but cannot incorporate  those standards into the law.  When a judge makes reference to moral  considerations in deciding a case, she necessarily creates new law on an  issue-and this is so even when the law directs her to consider moral  considerations, as the Bill of Rights does in certain circumstances.  On  this view, all law is settled law and questions of settled law can be  resolved without recourse to moral arguments:
The law on a question is settled when legally binding sources  provide its solution.  In such cases judges are typically said to apply  the  law, and since it is source-based, its application involves technical,  legal skills in reasoning from those sources and does not call for moral  acumen.  If a legal question is not answered by standards deriving from  legal sources then it lacks a legal answer-the law on such questions is  unsettled.  In deciding such cases courts inevitably break new (legal)  ground and their decision develops the law….  Naturally, their decisions  in such cases rely at least partly on moral and other extra-legal  considerations (Raz 1979, pp. 49-50).
If the judge can resolve an issue involving the First Amendment merely by  applying past court decisions, then the issue is settled by the law; if  not, then the issue is unsettled.  Insofar as the judge looks to  controversial moral standards to resolve the issue, she is going beyond  the  law because the mere presence of controversy about the law implies that it  is indeterminate.  Thus, on Raz’s view, references to moral language in  the  law, at most, direct judges to consider moral requirements in resolving  certain unsettled questions of law.  They cannot incorporate moral  requirements into the law.
 3. The Discretion Thesis
Third thesis commonly associated with  positivism is the discretion thesis, according to which judges decide  difficult cases by making new law in the exercise of discretion.  Ronald  Dworkin describes this thesis as follows:
The set of these valid legal rules is exhaustive of ‘the law’,  so that if someone’s case is not clearly covered by such a rule . . . then  that case cannot be decided by ‘applying the law.’ It must be decided by  some official, like a judge, ‘exercising his discretion,’ which means  reaching beyond the law for some other sort of standard to guide him in  manufacturing a fresh legal rule or supplementing an old one (Dworkin  1977,  p. 17).
On this view, a judge cannot decide a case that does not fall clearly  under  a valid rule by interpreting or applying the law; she must decide the case  by creating or promulgating a law that did not exist prior to the  adjudication.  Thus, the discretion thesis implies that judges are  empowered with a quasi-legislative lawmaking authority in cases that  cannot  be decided merely by applying law.
Though often associated with positivism, the discretion thesis does  not  belong to positivism’s theoretical core.  The pedigree and separability  theses purport to be conceptual claims that are true of every possible  legal system.  These two claims jointly assert that, in every possible  legal system, propositions of law are valid in virtue of having been  manufactured according to some set of social conventions.  On this view,  there are no moral constraints on the content of law that hold in every  possible legal system.
But many positivists regard the discretion thesis as a contingent  claim  that is true of some, but not all, possible legal systems.  Hart, for  example, believes there will inevitably arise cases that do not fall  clearly under a rule, but concedes a rule of recognition could deny judges  discretion to make law in such cases by requiring judges “to disclaim  jurisdiction or to refer the points not regulated by the existing law to  the legislature to decide” (Hart 1994, p. 272).  Indeed, Hart’s inclusive  positivism allows him to hold that a rule of recognition could require  judges to decide cases in precisely the manner that Dworkin advocates  (Hart  1994, p. 263; and see Section IV-2, infra).  Thus, at least for  inclusive positivists like Hart, the discretion thesis makes a different  kind of claim than the conceptual claims that form positivism’s  theoretical  core (Himma 1999).
Moreover, the discretion thesis is consistent with some forms of  natural law theory.  According to Blackstone’s classical naturalism,  conformity with the natural law is a necessary condition for legal  validity  in every possible legal system.  But insofar as the natural law is  incomplete, there will inevitably arise issues that have multiple outcomes  consistent with the natural law.  Since none of the relevant outcomes in  such cases offend the natural law, there is nothing in the assumption of  necessary moral constraints on the content of law, in and of itself, that  precludes Blackstone from endorsing the discretion thesis in such cases.   Of course, if Blackstone believes the natural law contains a principle  denying discretion to judges, then that commitment is inconsistent  with the discretion thesis.  But the assertion there are necessary  constraints on the content of law, in and of itself, is consistent with  the  discretion thesis, even construed as a conceptual claim, as long as there  are cases to which the natural law is indifferent.
In any event, Dworkin distinguishes three different senses in which a  judge might be said to have discretion: (1) a judge has discretion when  she  exercises judgment in applying a legal standard to a particular case; (2)  a  judge has discretion when her decision is not subject to reversal by any  other authority; and (3) a judge has discretion when her decision is not  bound by any legal standards.
According to Dworkin, positivism’s discretion thesis is committed to  the third sense of discretion, which he refers to as strong discretion.  On  Dworkin’s view, the thesis that judges have discretion only in the sense  that they exercise judgment is trivially true, while the thesis that  judges  have discretion in the sense that their decisions are not subject to being  reversed by a higher authority is false.  Even the Supreme Court can be  reversed by Congress or by constitutional amendment.  Thus, on Dworkin’s  view, the discretion thesis implies that judges have discretion to decide  hard cases by what amounts to an act of legislation because the judge is  not bound by any legal standards.
Thus construed, the discretion thesis is inconsistent with ordinary  legal practice.  Even in the most difficult of cases where there is no  clearly applicable law, lawyers do not ask that the judge decide the  relevant issue by making new law.  Each lawyer cites cases favorable to  her  client’s position and argues that the judge is bound by those cases to  decide in her client’s favor.  As a practical matter, lawyers rarely, if  ever, concede there are no legal standards governing a case and ask the  judge to legislate in the exercise of discretion.
Nevertheless, the problem with Dworkin’s analysis is that it falsely  presupposes an official cannot make new law unless there are no legal  standards constraining the official’s decision.  Indeed, lawmaking  authorities in legal systems like the U.S. never have what Dworkin  describes as strong discretion.  Even the legislative decisions of  Congress, the highest legislative authority in the nation, are always  constrained by constitutional standards.  For example, under the  Fourteenth  Amendment, Congress cannot enact a law that sets one speed limit for  male  drivers on interstate highways and another for female drivers.
For his part, Hart concedes that judicial lawmaking authority is  limited in two respects: “not only are the judge’s powers subject to many  constraints narrowing his choice from which a legislature may be  quite free, but since the judge’s powers are exercised only to dispose of  particular instant cases he cannot use these to introduce large-scale  reforms or new codes” (Hart 1994, p. 273).  What explains the judge’s  discretion to make new law in a given case, on Hart’s view, is not the  absence of legal standards constraining her decision; rather it is the  absence of legal standards that dictate a uniquely correct answer to the  case.  The judge cannot decide such a case merely by applying existing law  because there is more than one available outcome that coheres with  existing  law.  In such instances, it is impossible to render a substantive decision  (as opposed to simply referring the matter back to the legislature)  without  creating new law.
The discretion thesis is vulnerable to one powerful objection.  Insofar  as a judge decides a difficult case by making new law in the exercise of  discretion, the case is being decided on the basis of a law that did not  exist at the time the dispute arose.  If, for example, a judge awards  damages to a plaintiff by making new law in the exercise of discretion, it  follows that she has held the defendant liable under a law that did not  exist at the time the dispute arose.  And, as Dworkin points out, it seems  patently unfair to deprive a defendant of property for behavior that did  not give rise to liability at the time the behavior occurred.
Nevertheless, Dworkin’s view fares no better on this count.  While  Dworkin acknowledges the existence of difficult cases that do not fall  clearly under a rule, he believes they are not resolved by an exercise of  judicial discretion.  On Dworkin’s view, there is always a right answer to  such cases implicit in the pre-existing law.  Of course, it sometimes  takes  a judge of Herculean intellectual ability to discern what the right answer  is, but it is always there to be found in pre-existing law.  Since the  right answer to even hard legal disputes is always part of pre-existing  law, Dworkin believes that a judge can take property from a defendant in a  hard case without unfairness (Dworkin 1977, pp. 87-130).
But if fairness precludes taking property from a defendant under a law  that did not exist at the time of the relevant behavior, it also precludes  taking property from a defendant under a law that did not give reasonable  notice that the relevant behavior gives rise to liability.  Due process  and  fundamental fairness require reasonable notice of which behaviors give  rise  to liability.  As long as Dworkin acknowledges the existence of cases so  difficult that only the best of judges can solve them, his theory is  vulnerable to the same charge of unfairness that he levels at the discretion thesis.
 4. Classic Criticisms of Positivism
 a. Fuller’s Internal Morality of Law
In The Morality of  Law, Lon L. Fuller argues that law is subject to an internal morality  consisting of eight principles: (P1) the rules must be expressed in  general  terms; (P2) the rules must be publicly promulgated; (P3) the rules must be  (for the most part) prospective in effect; (P4) the rules must be  expressed  in understandable terms; (P5) the rules must be consistent with one  another; (P6) the rules must not require conduct beyond the powers of the  affected parties; (P7) the rules must not be changed so frequently that  the  subject cannot rely on them; and (P8) the rules must be administered in a  manner consistent with their wording (Fuller 1964, p. 39).
On Fuller’s view, no system of rules that fails minimally to satisfy  these principles of legality can achieve law’s essential purpose of  achieving social order through the use of rules that guide behavior.  A  system of rules that fails to satisfy (P2) or (P4), for example, cannot  guide behavior because people will not be able to determine what the rules  require.  Accordingly, Fuller concludes that his eight principles are  “internal” to law in the sense that they are built into the existence  conditions for law: “A total failure in any one of these eight directions  does not simply result in a bad system of law; it results in something  that  is not properly called a legal system at all” (Fuller 1964, p. 39).
These internal principles constitute a morality, according to Fuller,  because law necessarily has positive moral value in two respects: (1) law  conduces to a state of social order and (2) does so by respecting human  autonomy because rules guide behavior.  Since no system of rules  can  achieve these morally valuable objectives without minimally complying with  the principles of legality, it follows, on Fuller’s view, that they  constitute a morality.  Since these moral principles are built into the  existence conditions for law, they are internal and hence represent a  conceptual connection between law and morality that is inconsistent with  the separability thesis.
Hart responds by denying Fuller’s claim that the principles of  legality  constitute an internal morality; on Hart’s view, Fuller confuses the  notions of morality and efficacy:
[T]he author’s insistence on classifying these principles of  legality as a “morality” is a source of confusion both for him and his  readers….  [T]he crucial objection to the designation of these  principles  of good legal craftsmanship as morality, in spite of the qualification  “inner,” is that it perpetrates a confusion between two notions that it is  vital to hold apart: the notions of purposive activity and morality.   Poisoning is no doubt a purposive activity, and reflections on its purpose  may show that it has its internal principles.  (“Avoid poisons however  lethal if they cause the victim to vomit”….)  But to call these  principles of the poisoner’s art “the morality of poisoning” would simply  blur the distinction between the notion of efficiency for a purpose and  those final judgments about activities and purposes with which morality in  its various forms is concerned (Hart 1965, pp. 1285-86).
On Hart’s view, all actions, including virtuous acts like lawmaking and  impermissible acts like poisoning, have their own internal standards of  efficacy.  But insofar as such standards of efficacy conflict with  morality, as they do in the case of poisoning, it follows that they are  distinct from moral standards.  Thus, while Hart concedes that something  like Fuller’s eight principles are built into the existence conditions for  law, he concludes that they do not constitute a conceptual connection  between law and morality.
Unfortunately, Hart’s response overlooks the fact that most of  Fuller’s  eight principles double as moral ideals of fairness.  For example, public  promulgation in understandable terms may be a necessary condition for  efficacy, but it is also a moral ideal; it is morally objectionable for a  state to enforce rules that have not been publicly promulgated in terms  reasonably calculated to give notice of what is required.  Similarly, we  take it for granted that it is wrong for a state to enact retroactive  rules, inconsistent rules, and rules that require what is impossible.   Poisoning may have its internal standards of efficacy, but such standards  are distinguishable from the principles of legality in that they conflict  with moral ideals.
Nevertheless, Fuller’s principles operate internally, not as moral  ideals, but merely as principles of efficacy.  As Fuller would likely  acknowledge, the existence of a legal system is consistent with  considerable divergence from the principles of legality.  Legal standards,  for example, are necessarily promulgated in general terms that inevitably  give rise to problems of vagueness.  And officials all too often fail to  administer the laws in a fair and even-handed manner-even in the best of  legal systems.  These divergences may always be prima facie objectionable, but they are inconsistent with a legal system only when  they  render a legal system incapable of performing its essential function of  guiding behavior.  Insofar as these principles are built into the  existence  conditions for law, it is because they operate as efficacy conditions-and  not because they function as moral ideals.
Fuller’s jurisprudential legacy, however, should not be  underestimated.   While positivists have long acknowledged that law’s essential purpose is  to guide behavior through rules (e.g., John Austin writes that “[a] law  ..  may be defined as a rule laid down for the guidance of an intelligent  being  by an intelligent being having power over him” Austin 1977, p. 5), they  have not always appreciated the implications of this purpose.  Fuller’s  lasting contribution to the theory of law was to flesh out these  implications in the form of his principles of legality.
 b. Positivism and Legal Principles
Dworkin argues that, in  deciding hard cases, judges often invoke legal principles that do not  derive their authority from an official act of promulgation (Dworkin 1977,  p. 40).  These principles, Dworkin believes, must be characterized as law  because judges are bound to consider them when relevant.  But if  unpromulgated legal principles constitute law, then it is false,  contra the pedigree thesis, that a proposition of law is valid only  in virtue of having been formally promulgated.
According to Dworkin, principles and rules differ in the kind of  guidance they provide to judges:
Rules are applicable in an all-or-nothing fashion.  If the  facts a rule stipulates are given, then either the rule is valid, in which  case the answer it supplies must be accepted, or it is not, in which case  it contributes nothing to the decision….  But this is not the way  principles operate….  [A principle] states a reason that argues in one  direction, but does not necessitate a particular decision (Dworkin 1977,  pp. 24-25).
On Dworkin’s view, conflicting principles provide competing reasons that  must be weighed according to the importance of the respective values they  express.  Thus, rules are distinguishable from principles in two related  respects: (1) rules necessitate, where principles only suggest, a  particular outcome; and (2) principles have, where rules lack, the  dimension of weight.
Dworkin cites the case of Riggs v. Palmer as representative of  how judges use principles to decide hard cases.  In Riggs, the  court  considered the question of whether a murderer could take under the will of  his victim.  At the time the case was decided, neither the statutes nor  the  case law governing wills expressly prohibited a murderer from taking under  his victim’s will.  Despite this, the court declined to award the  defendant  his gift under the will on the ground that it would be wrong to allow him  to profit from such a grievous wrong.  On Dworkin’s view, the court  decided  the case by citing “the principle that no man may profit from his own  wrong  as a background standard against which to read the statute of wills and in  this way justified a new interpretation of that statute” (Dworkin 1977, p.  29).
The positivist might respond that when the Riggs court  considered this principle, it was reaching beyond the law to extralegal  standards in the exercise of judicial discretion.  But Dworkin points out  that the Riggs judges would “rightfully” have been criticized had  they failed to consider this principle; if it were merely an extralegal  standard, there would be no rightful grounds to criticize a failure to  consider it (Dworkin 1977, p. 35).  Accordingly, Dworkin concludes that  the  best explanation for the propriety of such criticism is that principles  are  part of the law.
Further, Dworkin maintains that the legal authority of standards like  the Riggs principle cannot derive from promulgation in accordance  with purely formal requirements: “[e]ven though principles draw support  from the official acts of legal institutions, they do not have a simple or  direct enough connection with these acts to frame that connection in terms  of criteria specified by some ultimate master rule of recognition”  (Dworkin  1977, p. 41).  Unlike legal rules, legal principles lack a canonical form  and hence cannot be explained by formal promulgation.
On Dworkin’s view, the legal authority of a binding principle derives  from the contribution it makes to the best moral justification for a  society’s legal practices considered as a whole.  According to Dworkin, a  legal principle maximally contributes to such a justification if and only  if it satisfies two conditions: (1) the principle coheres with existing  legal materials; and (2) the principle is the most morally attractive  standard that satisfies (1).  The correct legal principle is the one that  makes the law the moral best it can be.  Thus, Dworkin concludes, “if we  treat principles as law we must reject the positivists’ first tenet, that  the law of a community is distinguished from other social standards by  some  test in the form of a master rule” (Dworkin 1977, p. 44).
In response, positivists concede that there are legal principles, but  argue that their authority as law can be explained in terms of the  conventions contained in the rule of recognition:
Legal principles, like other laws, can be enacted or repealed  by legislatures and administrative authorities.  They can also become  legally binding through establishment by the courts.  Many legal systems  recognize that both rules and principles can be made into law or lose  their  status as law through precedent (Raz 1972, p. 848).
According to this view, legal principles are like legal rules in that both  derive their authority under the rule of recognition from the official  acts  of courts and legislatures.  If the Riggs principle that no person  shall profit from her own wrong has legal authority, it is because that  principle was either declared by a court in the course of adjudicating a  dispute or formally promulgated by the appropriate legislative body.
Further, inclusive positivists argue that Dworkin’s account of  principles is itself consistent with the pedigree thesis.  As Hart puts  it,  “this interpretative test seems not to be an alternative to a criterion  provided by a rule of recognition, but … only a complex  ‘soft-positivist’  form of such a criterion identifying principles by their content not by  their pedigree” (Hart 1994, p. 263).  The idea, familiar from Section II,  is that a rule of recognition can incorporate content-based constraints on  legal validity, even those rooted ultimately in morality.
 c. The Semantic Sting
In Law’s Empire, Dworkin  distinguishes two kinds of disagreement legal practitioners can have about  the law.  Lawyers can agree on the criteria a rule must satisfy to be  legally valid, but disagree on whether those criteria are satisfied by a  particular rule.  For example, two lawyers might agree that a rule is  valid  if enacted by the state legislature, but disagree on whether the rule at  issue was actually enacted by the state legislature.  Such disagreements  are empirical in nature and hence pose no theoretical difficulties for  positivism.
There is, however, a second kind of disagreement that Dworkin  believes  is inconsistent with positivism.  Lawyers often agree on the facts about a  rule’s creation, but disagree on whether those facts are sufficient to  endow the rule with legal authority.  Such disagreement is considerably  deeper than empirical disagreement as it concerns the criteria for legal  validity-which, according to positivism, are exhausted by the rule of  recognition.  Dworkin calls this second kind of disagreement theoretical  disagreement about the law.
Theoretical disagreement, on Dworkin’s view, is inconsistent with the  pedigree thesis because the pedigree thesis explains the concept of law in  terms of shared criteria for creating, changing and adjudicating law:
If legal argument is mainly or even partly about [the  properties that make a proposition legally valid], then lawyers cannot all  be using the same factual criteria for deciding when propositions of law  are true and false.  Their arguments would be mainly or partly about which  criteria they should use.  So the project of the semantic theories, the  project of digging out shared rules from a careful study of what lawyers  say and do, would be doomed to fail (Dworkin 1986, p.  43).
If lawyers disagree about the criteria of legal validity, then the grounds  of legal validity cannot be exhausted by the shared criteria contained in  a  rule of recognition.  The semantic sting, then, implies that there must be  more to the concept of legal validity than can be explained by  promulgation  in accordance with shared criteria embodied in a rule of recognition.
The semantic sting resembles one of Dworkin’s earlier criticisms of  Hart’s pedigree thesis.  Hart believes that the rule of recognition is a  social rule and is hence constituted by the conforming behavior of people  who also accept the rule as a ground for criticizing deviations.  Like all  social rules, then, the rule of recognition has an external and internal  aspect.  The external aspect of the rule of recognition consists in  general  obedience to those rules satisfying its criteria of validity; the internal  aspect is constituted by its acceptance as a public standard of official  behavior.  Hart believes it is this double aspect of the rule of  recognition that accounts for its normativity and enables him to  distinguish his theory from Austin’s view of law as a system of coercive  commands.  For, as Hart points out, a purely coercive command can  oblige,  but never obligate, a person to comply (see Section I, supra).
Dworkin argues that this feature of Hart’s theory commits him to the  claim that there cannot be any disagreement about the content of rule of  recognition:
Hart’s qualification … that the rule of recognition may be  uncertain at particular points … undermines [his theory]….  If judges  are in fact divided about what they must do if a subsequent Parliament  tries to repeal an entrenched rule, then it is not uncertain whether any  social rule [of recognition] governs that decision; on the contrary, it is  certain that none does (Dworkin 1977, pp. 61-62).
On Dworkin’s view, the requirements of a social rule cannot be uncertain  since a social rule is constituted by acceptance and conforming behavior  by  most people in the relevant group: “two people whose rules differ …  cannot be appealing to the same social rule, and at least one of them  cannot be appealing to any social rule at all” (Dworkin 1977, p. 55).
Jules Coleman responds that if the rule of recognition is a social  rule, then Hart’s view implies there must be general agreement among the  officials of a legal system about what standards constitute the rule of  recognition, but it does not imply there cannot be disagreement as to what  those standards require in any given instance:
The controversy among judges does not arise over the  content  of  the rule of recognition itself.  It arises over which norms satisfy the  standards set forth in it.  The divergence in behavior among officials as  exemplified in their identifying different standards as legal ones does  not  establish their failure to accept the same rule of recognition.  On the  contrary, judges accept the same truth conditions for propositions of  law….  They disagree about which propositions satisfy those conditions  (Coleman 1982, p. 156).
Coleman, then, distinguishes two kinds of disagreement practitioners can  have about the rule of recognition: (1) disagreement about what standards  constitute the rule of recognition; and (2) disagreement about what  propositions satisfy those standards.  On Coleman’s view, Hart’s analysis  of social rules implies only that (1) is impossible.
Under the U.S. rule of recognition, for example, a federal statute is  legally valid if and only if it has been enacted in accordance with the  procedural requirements described in the body of the Constitution and is  consistent with the first fourteen amendments.  Since, on Hart’s view, the  U.S. rule of recognition is a social rule, U.S. officials must agree on  the  procedures the federal government must follow in enacting law, the set of  sentences constituting the first fourteen amendments, and the requirement  that federal enactments be consistent with those amendments.
But Hart’s view of social rules does not imply there cannot be any  disagreement about whether a given enactment is consistent with the first  fourteen amendments.  Legal practitioners can and do disagree on what  Hart  calls penumbral (or borderline) issues regarding the various amendments.   While every competent practitioner in the U.S. would agree, for example,  that torturing a person to induce a confession violates the fifth  amendment  right against self-incrimination, there is considerable disagreement about  whether compelling a defendant to undergo a psychiatric examination for  the  purpose of increasing her sentence also violates that right.  On Coleman’s  view, there is nothing in Hart’s analysis of social rules that precludes  such borderline disagreements about whether a practice is consistent with  the Fifth Amendment.
Despite its resemblance to this earlier criticism, Dworkin’s semantic  sting argument takes aim at a deeper target.  The semantic sting targets  all so-called semantic theories of law that articulate the concept of law  in terms of “shared rules … that set out criteria that supply the word’s  meaning” (Dworkin 1986, p. 31).  Thus, while the earlier criticism is  directed at Hart’s extraneous account of social rules, the semantic sting  is directed at what Dworkin takes to be the very heart of positivism’s  theoretical core, namely, the claim that there are shared criteria that  exhaust the conditions for the correct application of the concept of law.
At the root of the problem with semantic theories, on Dworkin’s view,  is a flawed theory of what makes disagreement possible.  According to  Dworkin, semantic theories mistakenly assume that meaningful  disagreement  is impossible unless “we all accept and follow the same criteria for  deciding when our claims are sound, even if we cannot state exactly, as a  philosopher might hope to do, what these criteria are” (Dworkin 1986, p.  45).  On this flawed assumption, two people whose concepts of law differ  cannot be disagreeing about the same thing.
Perhaps with Coleman’s response to his earlier criticism in mind,  Dworkin concedes that semantic theories are consistent with theoretical  disagreements about borderline or penumbral cases: “people do  sometimes  speak at cross-purposes in the way the borderline defense describes”  (Dworkin 1986, p. 41).  But Dworkin denies semantic theories are consistent with   theoretical disagreement about pivotal (or core) cases.  According to   semantic theories, he says,
[Y]ou and I can sensibly  discuss how many books I have on my shelf, for example, only if we both  agree, at least roughly, about what a book is.  We can disagree over  borderline cases: I may call something a slim book that you would call a  pamphlet.  But we cannot disagree over what I called pivotal cases.  If  you  do not count my copy of Moby-Dick as a book because in your view  novels are not books, any disagreement is bound to be senseless (Dworkin  1986, p. 45).
The problem, on Dworkin’s view, is that many difficult appellate cases  like Riggs involve theoretical disagreement about pivotal cases:
The various judges who argued about our sample cases did  not  think they were defending marginal or borderline claims.  Their  disagreements about legislation and precedent were fundamental; their  arguments showed that they disagreed not only about whether Elmer  should  have his inheritance, but about why any legislative act, even traffic  codes  and rates of taxation, impose the rights and obligations everyone agrees  they do….  They disagreed about what makes a proposition of law true not  just at the margin but in the core as well (Dworkin 1986, pp.  42-43).
On Dworkin’s view, the judges in Riggs were not having a borderline  dispute about some accepted criterion for the application of the concept  of  law.  Rather, they were having a disagreement about the status of some  putatively fundamental criterion itself: the majority believed, while the  dissent denied, that courts have power to modify unambiguous legislative  enactments.
Accordingly, theoretical disagreement about pivotal cases like  Riggs is inconsistent with semantic theories of law, on Dworkin’s  view, because it shows that shared criteria do not exhaust the proper  conditions for the application of the concept of law.  For the majority  and  dissenting judges in Riggs were having a sensible disagreement  about  law even though it centered on a pivotal case involving the criteria of  legal validity.  Thus, Dworkin concludes, the concept of law cannot be  explained by so-called criterial semantics.
In response, Hart denies both that his theory is a semantic theory and  that it assumes such an account of what makes disagreement possible:
[N]othing in my book or in anything else I have written  supports [a semantic account] of my theory.  Thus, my doctrine that  developed municipal legal systems contain a rule of recognition specifying  the criteria for the identification of the laws which courts have to apply  may be mistaken, but I nowhere base this doctrine on the mistaken idea  that  it is part of the meaning of the word ‘law’ that there should be such a  rule of recognition in all legal systems, or on the even more mistaken  idea  that if the criteria for the identification of the grounds of law were not  uncontroversially fixed, ‘law’ would mean different things to different  people (Hart 1994, p. 246).
Instead, Hart argues that his theory of law is “a descriptive account of  the distinctive features of law in general as a complex social phenomenon”  (Hart 1994, p. 246).  Hart presents his theory, not as an account of how  people apply the concept of law, but rather as an account of what  distinguishes systems of law from other systems of social rules.  On  Hart’s  view, it is the presence of a rule of recognition establishing criteria of  validity that distinguishes law from other systems of social rules.  Thus,  according to Hart, Dworkin’s criticism fails because it mischaracterizes  positivism as providing a criterial explanation of the concept of law.
5. References and Further Reading

Austin, John, Lectures on Jurisprudence and the Philosophy of Positive  Law (St. Clair Shores, MI: Scholarly Press, 1977)
Austin, John, The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University Press, 1995)
Bentham, Jeremy, Of Laws In General (London: Athlone Press,  1970)
Blackstone, William, Commentaries on the Law of England (Chicago:  The University of Chicago Press, 1979)
Coleman, Jules, “Negative and Positive Positivism,” 11 Journal of Legal  Studies 139 (1982)
Dworkin, Ronald M., Law’s Empire (Cambridge: Harvard University  Press, 1986)
Dworkin, Ronald M., Taking Rights Seriously (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,  1977)
Finnis, John, Natural Law and Natural Rights (Oxford: Clarendon  Press, 1980)
Fuller, Lon L., The Morality of Law, Revised Edition (New Haven:  Yale University Press, 1969)
Fuller, Lon L., “Positivism and Fidelity to Law–A Reply to Professor Hart,” 71  Harvard Law Review 630 (1958)
Faber, Klaus, “Farewell to ‘Legal Positivism’: The Separation Thesis  Unraveling,” in George, Robert P., The  Autonomy of Law: Essays on Legal Positivism (Oxford: Clarendon  Press,  1996), 119-162
George, Robert P., “Natural Law and Positive Law,” in George, Robert P.,  The Autonomy of Law: Essays on Legal Positivism (Oxford:  Clarendon  Press, 1996), 321-334
Hart, H.L.A., The Concept of Law, Second Edition (Oxford:  Clarendon  Press, 1994)
Hart, H.L.A., “American Jurisprudence through English Eyes: The Nightmare and  the  Noble Dream,” reprinted in Hart, H.L.A., Essays in Jurisprudence and  Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), 123-144.
Hart, H.L.A., “Book Review of The Morality of Law” 78 Harvard Law  Review 1281 (1965)
Hart, H.L.A., Essays on Bentham (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982)
Hart, H.L.A., “Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals,” 71 Harvard Law  Review 593 (1958)
Himma, Kenneth E., “Judicial Discretion and the Concept of Law,”  forthcoming in Oxford Journal of Legal Studies vol. 18, no. 1  (1999)
Mackie, J.L., “The Third Theory of Law,” Philosophy & Public  Affairs, vol. 7, no. 1 (Fall 1977)
Moore, Michael, “Law as a Functional Kind,” in George, Robert P. (ed.),  Natural Law Theory: Contemporary Essays (Oxford: Clarendon  Press,  1992), 188-242
Raz, Joseph, The Authority of Law: Essays on Law and Morality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979)
Raz, Joseph, “Authority, Law and Morality,” The Monist, vol. 68,  295-324
Raz, Joseph, “Legal Principles and the Limits of Law,” 81 Yale Law Review 823 (1972)
Raz, Joseph, “Two Views of the Nature of the Theory of Law: A Partial  Comparison,”  Legal Theory, vol. 4, no. 3 (September 1998), 249-282
Waluchow, W.J., Inclusive Legal Positivism (Oxford: Clarendon  Press,  1994)

Author Information
Kenneth Einar Himma
Email: himma@spu.edu
Seattle Pacific University
U. S. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







