








Gnosticism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














Gnosticism
Gnosticism (after gnôsis, the Greek word for “knowledge”  or “insight”) is the name given to a loosely organized religious and philosophical  movement that flourished in the first and second centuries CE. The exact  origin(s) of this school of thought cannot be traced, although it is possible  to locate influences or sources as far back as the second and first centuries  BCE, such as the early treatises of the Corpus Hermeticum, the Jewish  Apocalyptic writings, and especially Platonic philosophy and the Hebrew  Scriptures themselves.
In spite of the diverse nature of the various Gnostic  sects and teachers, certain fundamental elements serve to bind these groups  together under the loose heading of “Gnosticism” or “Gnosis.” Chief among  these elements is a certain manner of “anti-cosmic world rejection” that  has often been mistaken for mere dualism. According to the Gnostics, this  world, the material cosmos, is the result of a primordial error on the  part of a supra-cosmic, supremely divine being, usually called Sophia (Wisdom) or simply the Logos. This being is described as the final  emanation of a divine hierarchy, called the Plêrôma or “Fullness,” at the head of which resides the supreme God, the One beyond  Being. The error of Sophia, which is usually identified as a reckless desire  to know the transcendent God, leads to the hypostatization of her desire  in the form of a semi-divine and essentially ignorant creature known as  the Demiurge (Greek: dêmiourgos, “craftsman”), or Ialdabaoth,  who is responsible for the formation of the material cosmos. This act of  craftsmanship is actually an imitation of the realm of the Pleroma, but  the Demiurge is ignorant of this, and hubristically declares himself the  only existing God. At this point, the Gnostic revisionary critique of the  Hebrew Scriptures begins, as well as the general rejection of this world  as a product of error and ignorance, and the positing of a higher world,  to which the human soul will eventually return. However, when all is said  and done, one finds that the error of Sophia and the begetting of the inferior  cosmos are occurrences that follow a certain law of necessity, and that  the so-called “dualism” of the divine and the earthly is really a reflection  and expression of the defining tension that constitutes the being of humanity—the human being.
Table of Contents

The Philosophical Character of Gnosticism 

Psychology 
Existentialism 
Hermeneutics 

Reception and Revelation 




The Gnostic Mytho-Logos 

The Myth of Sophia 
Christian Gnosticism 

Basilides 
Marcion 
Valentinus and the Valentinian School 

The System of Ptolemy 




Mani and Manichaeism 


Platonism and Gnosticism 

Numenius of Apamea and Neo-Platonism 


Concluding Summary 
References and Further Reading 

Sources 
Suggestions for Further Reading 



 1. The Philosophical Character of Gnosticism
Gnosticism, as an intellectual product, is grounded firmly in the general  human act of reflecting upon existence. The Gnostics were concerned with  the basic questions of existence or “being-in-the-world” (Dasein)—that is:  who we are (as human beings), where we have come  from, and  where we are heading, historically and spiritually  (cf. Hans Jonas, The Gnostic Religion 1958, p. 334). These questions  lie at the very root of philosophical thinking; but the answers provided  by the Gnostics go beyond philosophical speculation toward the realm of  religious doctrine and mysticism. However, it is impossible to understand  fully the meaning of Gnosticism without beginning at the philosophical  level, and orienting oneself accordingly. Since any orientation toward  an ancient phenomenon must always proceed by way of contemporary ideas  and habits of mind, an interpretative discussion of Gnostic thinking as  it applies to Psychology, Existentialism, and Hermeneutics, is not amiss  here. Once we have understood, to the extent of our ability, the philosophical  import of Gnostic ideas, and how they relate to contemporary philosophical  issues, then we may enter into the historical milieu of the Gnostics  with some degree of confidence—a confidence devoid, to the extent that  this is possible, of tainting exegetical presuppositions.
 a. Psychology
Who are we? The answer to this question involves an account (logos)  of the nature of the soul (psukhê or psyche); and the attempt  to provide an answer has accordingly been dubbed the science or practice  of “psychology”—an account of the soul or mind (psukhê,  in ancient Greek, denoted both soul, as the principle of life, and mind,  as the principle of intellect). Carl Jung, drawing upon Gnostic mythical  schemas, identified the objectively oriented consciousness with the material  or “fleshly” part of humankind—that is, with the part of the human being  that is, according to the Gnostics, bound up in the cosmic cycle of generation  and decay, and subject to the bonds of fate and time (cf. Apocryphon  of John [Codex II] 28:30). The human being who identifies him/herself  with the objectively existing world comes to construct a personality, a  sense of self, that is, at base, fully dependent upon the ever-changing  structures of temporal existence. The resulting lack of any sense of permanence, of autonomy, leads such an individual to experience anxieties  of all kinds, and eventually to shun the mysterious and collectively meaningful  patterns of human existence in favor of a private and stifling subjective  context, in the confines of which life plays itself out in the absence  of any reference to a greater plan or scheme.  Hopelessness, atheism,  despair, are the results of such an existence. This is not the natural  end of the human being, though; for, according to Jung (and the Gnostics)  the temporally constructed self is not the true self. The true self is  the supreme consciousness existing and persisting beyond all space and  time. Jung calls this the  pure consciousness or Self, in contradistinction  to the “ego consciousness” which is the temporally constructed and maintained  form of a discrete existent (cf. C.G. Jung, “Gnostic Symbols of the Self,” in  The  Gnostic Jung 1992, pp. 55-92). This latter form of “worldly” consciousness  the Gnostics identified with soul (psukhê), while the pure  or true Self they identified with spirit (pneuma)—that is, mind  relieved of its temporal contacts and context. This distinction had an  important career in Gnostic thought, and was adopted by St. Paul, most  notably in his doctrine of the spiritual resurrection (1 Corinthians 15:44).  The psychological or empirical basis of this view, which soon turns into  a metaphysical or onto-theological attitude, is the recognized inability  of the human mind to achieve its grandest designs while remaining subject  to the rigid law and order of a disinterested and aloof cosmos. The spirit-soul  distinction (which of course translates into, or perhaps presupposes, the  more fundamental mind-body distinction) marks the beginning of a transcendentalist  and soteriological attitude toward the cosmos and temporal existence in  general.
 b. Existentialism
The basic experience of existence, described by the philosophy that  has become known as “Existentialism,” involves a general feeling of loneliness  or abandonment (Geworfenheit, “having been thrown”) in/to a world  that is not amenable to the primordial desires of the human being (cf.  Jonas, p. 336). The recognition that the first or primal desire of the  human being is for the actualization or positing of a concrete self or “I” (an autonomous and discrete individual existing and persisting amidst  the flux and flow of temporal and external “reality”) leads to the disturbing  realization that this world is not akin to the human being; for this world  (so it seems) follows it own course, a course already mapped out and set  in motion long before the advent of human consciousness. Furthermore, that  the essential activity of the human being—that is, to actualize an autonomous  self within the world—is carried out in opposition to a power or “will”  (the force of nature) that always seems to thwart or subvert this supremely  human endeavor, leads to the acknowledgment of an anti-human and therefore  anti-intellectual power; and this power, since it seems to act, must also  exist. However, the fact that its act does not manifest itself as a communication  between humanity and nature (or pure objectivity), but rather as  a mechanical process of blind necessity occurring apart from the human  endeavor, places the human being in a superior position. For even though  the force of nature may arbitrarily wipe out an individual human existent,  just as easily as it brings one into existence, this natural force is not  conscious of its activity.  The human mind, on the other hand, is.  And so a gap or fissure—a product of reflection—is set up, by which  the human being may come to orient him/herself with and toward the world  in which s/he exists and persists, for a brief moment. Martin Heidegger has described this brief moment of orientation with/in (toward) the world  as “care” (Sorge), which is always a care or concern for the “moment”  (Augenblick) within which all existence occurs; this “care” is understood  as the product of humankind’s recognition of their unavoidable being-toward-death.  But this orientation is never completed, since the human soul finds that  it cannot achieve its purpose or complete actualization within the confines  set by nature.
While the thwarting necessity of nature is, for the Existentialist,  a simple, unquestioned fact; for the Gnostics it is the result of the malignant  designs of an inferior god, the Demiurge, carried out through and by this  ignorant deity’s own law. In other words, nature is, for modern Existentialism,  merely indifferent, while for the Gnostics it was actively hostile toward  the human endeavor. “[C]osmic law, once worshipped as the expression of  a reason with which man’s reason can communicate in the act of cognition,  is now seen only in its aspect of compulsion which thwarts man’s freedom”  (Jonas, p. 328). Time and history come to be understood as the provenance  of the human mind, over-against futile idealistic constructions like law  and order, nomos and cosmos. Knowledge, at this point, becomes  a concrete endeavor—a self-salvific task for the human race.
Becoming aware of itself, the self also discovers that it is  not really its own, but is rather the involuntary executor of cosmic designs.  Knowledge, gnosis, may liberate man from this servitude; but since  the cosmos is contrary to life and to spirit, the saving knowledge  cannot aim at integration into the cosmic whole and at compliance with  its laws. For the Gnostics … man’s alienation from the world is to be  deepened and brought to a head, for the extrication of the inner self which  only thus can gain itself (Jonas, p. 329).
The obvious question, then—Where did we come from? —  only becomes intelligible alongside and within the more dynamic question  of Where are we heading?
 c. Hermeneutics
In the context of ancient Greek thinking, hermêneia was  usually associated with tekhnê, giving us the tekhnê  hermêneutikê or “art of interpretation” discussed by   Aristotle in his treatise De Interpretatione [Peri Hermêneias]. Interpretation  or hermeneutics, according to Aristotle, does not bring us to a direct  knowledge of the meaning of things, but only to an understanding of how  things come to appear before us, and thereby to provide us with an avenue  toward empirical knowledge, as it were.
Moreover, discourse is hermêneia because  a discursive statement is a grasp of the real by meaningful expression,  not a selection of so-called impressions coming from the things themselves (Paul Ricoeur, The Conflict of Interpretations 1974, p. 4).
In this  sense, we may say that the “art of interpretation” is a distinctly historical method  of understanding or coming to terms with reality. In other words, since  our “expression” is always an ex-position, a going-out from the  given forms or patterns of reality toward a living use of these forms with/in  Life, then we, as human beings persisting in a realm of becoming, are responsible,  in the last analysis, not for any eternal truths or “things in themselves,”  but only for the forms these things take on within the context of a living  and thinking existence. Knowledge or understanding, then, is not of immutable  and eternal things in themselves, but rather of the process by which things—that is, ideas, objects, events, persons, etc.—become revealed within  the existential or ontological process of coming-to-know. The attention  to process and the emergence of meaning occurs on the most immediate experiential  level of human existence, and therefore contains about it nothing of the  metaphysical. However, the birth of metaphysics may be located within this  primordial or phenomenal structure of basic “brute” experience; for it  is the natural tendency of the human mind to order and arrange its data  according to rational principles.
The question will inevitably arise, though,  as to whence these rational principles derive: are they a derivative product  of the phenomenal realm of experience? or are they somehow endemic to the  human mind as such, and hence eternal? If we take the first question as  an answer, we are led to phenomenology, which “discovers, in place of an  idealist subject locked within [a] system of meanings, a living being which  from all time has, as the horizon of all its intentions, a world, the world”  (Ricoeur, p. 9). According to the general contemporary or “post-modern”  formulation, such a “living being” is directed, intentionally, always and  only toward a multiplicitous world or realm in which human activity itself  becomes the sole object of knowledge, apart from any “transcendent” metaphysical  ideals or schemas. For the Gnostics, on the other hand, who worked within  and upon the latter question, giving it a positive, if somewhat mytho-poetical  answer, rational principles, which seem to be culled from a mere contact  with sensible reality, are held to be reminders of a unified existence  that is an eternal possibility, open to anyone capable of transcending  and, indeed, transgressing this realm of experience and process —that is, of history. This “transgression” consists in the act of balancing  oneself with/in, and orienting oneself toward, history as an interplay  of past and present, in which the individual is poised for a decision—either to succumb to the flux and flow of an essentially decentered cosmic  existence, or to strive for a re-integration into a godhead that is only  barely recollected, and more obscure than the immediate perceptions of  reality.
 i. Reception and Revelation
Where are we heading? This question is at the very heart of Gnostic  exegesis, and indeed colors and directs all attempts at coming to terms,  not only with the Hebrew Scriptures, which served as the main text of Gnostic  interpretation, but with existence in general.
The standard hermeneutical  approach, both in our own era, and in Late Hellenistic times, is the receptive approach—that is, an engagement with texts of the past governed by the  belief, on the part of the interpreter, that these texts have something  to teach us. Whether we struggle to overcome our own “prejudices” or presuppositions,  which are the inevitable result of our belonging to a particular tradition  by way of the hermeneutical act (Gadamer), or allow our prejudices to shape  our reading of a text, in an act of “creative misprision” (Bloom) we are  still acknowledging, in some way, our debt to or dependence upon the text  with which we are engaged. The Gnostics, in their reading of Scripture,  acknowledged no such debt; for they believed that the Hebrew Bible was  the written revelation of an inferior creator god (dêmiourgos),  filled with lies intended to cloud the minds and judgment of the spiritual  human beings (pneumatikoi) whom this Demiurge was intent on enslaving  in his material cosmos.
Indeed, while the receptive hermeneutical method  implies that we have something to learn from a text, the method employed  by the Gnostics, which we may call the “revelatory” method, was founded  upon the idea that they (the Gnostics) had received a supra-cosmic revelation,  either in the form of a “call,” or a vision, or even, perhaps, through  the exercise of philosophical dialectic. This “revelation” was the knowledge  (gnôsis) that humankind is alien to this realm, and possesses  a “home on high” within the plêrôma, the “Fullness,”  where all the rational desires of the human mind come to full and perfect  fruition. On this belief, all knowledge belonged to these Gnostics, and  any interpretation of the biblical text would be for the purpose of explaining  the true nature of things by elucidating the errors and distortions of  the Demiurge. This approach treated the past as something already overcome  yet still “present,” insofar as certain members of the human race were  still laboring under the old law—that is, were still reading the Scriptures  in the receptive manner. The Gnostic, insofar as he still remained within  the world, as an existing being, was, on the other hand, both present and  future. That is to say, the Gnostic embodied within himself the salvific  dynamism of a history that had broken from the constraint of a tyrannical  past, and found the freedom to invent itself anew. The Gnostic understood  himself to be at once at the center and at the end or culmination of this  history, and this idea or ideal was reflected most powerfully in ancient  Gnostic exegesis. We must now turn to a discussion of the concrete results  of this hermeneutical method.
 2. The Gnostic Mytho-Logos
The Gnostic Idea or Notion was not informed by a philosophical world-view  or procedure. Rather, the Gnostic vision of the world was based upon the  intuition of a radical and seemingly irreparable rupture between the realm  of experience (pathos) and the realm of true Being—that is, existence  in its positive, creative, or authentic aspect.
The problem  faced by the Gnostics was how to explain such a radical, pre-philosophical intuition.  This intuition is “pre-philosophical” because the brute experience of existing  in a world that is alien to humankind’s aspirations may submit itself to  a variety of interpretations. And the attempt at an interpretation may  take on the form of either muthos or logos—either a merely  descriptive rendering of the experience, or a rationally ordered account  of such an experience, including an explanation of its origins.  The  ancient Greek explanation of this experience was to call it a primal “awe”  or “wonder” felt by the human being as he faces the world that stands so  radically apart from him, and to posit this experience as the beginning  of philosophy (cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics 982b 10-25  and  Plato, Theaetetus 155d).  But the Gnostics recognized this  “awe” as the product of a radical disruption of the harmony of a realm  persisting beyond becoming—that is, beyond “becoming” in the sense of  pathos,  or “that which is undergone.” The muthos always corresponds to the  “first-hand” account rendered by one who has undergone, immediately, the  effect of a certain event. The myth is always an explanation of something  already known, and therefore carries its truth-claim along with it, just  as the immediacy of an event forbids any doubt or questioning on the part  of the one undergoing it. The logos, on the other hand, is the product  of a careful reflection (dianoia), and refers, for its truth-value,  not to the immediate moment of “grasping” a phenomenon (prolêpsis),  but to the moment of reflection during which one attains a conceptual knowledge  of the phenomenon, and first comes to “know” it as such—this is  gnôsis:  insight. The direct result of this gnôsis is the emergence  from the sense of existence as pathos, to the actuality of being  as aisthêsis—that is, reception and judgment of experience  by way of purely rational or divine criteria. Such criteria proceeds directly  from the logos, or divine “ordering principle,” to which the Gnostics  believed themselves to be related, by way of a divine genealogy. Although  Gnostic onto-theology proceeds by way of an elaborate myth, it is a myth  informed always by the  logos, and is, in this sense, a true mythology—that is, a rendering, in the immediacy of language, of that which is ever-present  (to the Gnostic) as a product of privileged reflection.
 a. The Myth of Sophia
According to Gnostic mythology (in general) We, humanity, are existing  in this realm because a member of the transcendent godhead, Sophia (Wisdom),  desired to actualize her innate potential for creativity without the approval  of her partner or divine consort.  Her hubris, in this regard,  stood forth as raw materiality, and her desire, which was for the mysterious  ineffable Father, manifested itself as Ialdabaoth, the Demiurge, that renegade  principle of generation and corruption which, by its unalterable necessity,  brings all beings to life, for a brief moment, and then to death for eternity.  However, since even the Pleroma itself is not, according to the Gnostics,  exempt from desire or passion, there must come into play a salvific event  or savior—that is, Christ, the Logos, the “messenger,” etc.—who descends  to the material realm for the purpose of negating all passion, and raising  the innocent human “sparks” (which fell from Sophia) back up to the Pleroma  (cf. Apocryphon of John [Codex II] 9:25-25:14 ff.).
This process  of re-integration with/in the godhead is one of the basic features of the  Gnostic myth.  The purpose of this re-integration (implicitly) is  to establish a series of existents that are ontologically posterior to  Sophia, and are the concrete embodiment of her “disruptive” desire—within  the unified arena of the Pleroma.  Indeed, if the Pleroma is really  the Fullness, containing all things, it must contain the manifold principles  of Wisdom’s longing. In this sense, we must not view Gnostic salvation  as a simply one-sided affair.  The divine “sparks” that fell from  Sophia, during her “passion,” are un-integrated aspects of the godhead.  We may say, then, that in the Hegelian sense the Gnostic Supreme God is  seeking, eternally, His own actualization by way of full self-consciousness  (cf. G.W.F. Hegel, History of Philosophy vol. 2, pp. 396-399).
But it is not really this simple.  The Supreme God of the Gnostics  effortlessly generates the Pleroma, and yet (or for this very reason!)  this Pleroma comes to act independently of the Father.  This is because  all members of the Pleroma (known as Aeons) are themselves “roots and springs  and fathers” (Tripartite Tractate 68:10) carrying Time within themselves,  as a condition of their Being.  When the disruption, brought about  by the desire of Sophia, disturbed the Pleroma, this was not understood  as a disturbance of an already established unity, but rather as the disturbance  of an insupportable stasis that had come to be observed as divine.  Indeed, when the Greeks first looked to the sky and admired the regularity  of the rotations of the stars and planets, what they were admiring, according  to the Gnostics, was not the image of divinity, but the image or representation  of a “divine” stagnancy, a law and order that stifled freedom, which is  the root of desire (cf. Jonas, pp. 260-261).  The passion of Sophia—her production of the Demiurge, his enslavement of the human “sparks”  in the material cosmos, and the subsequent redemption and restoration—are but one episode in the infinite, unfolding drama of spiritual existence.  We, as human beings, just happen to be the unwitting victims of this particular  drama.  But if, as the Gnostics hold, our salvation consists in our  becoming gods (Poimandres 26) or “lord[s] over creation and all  corruption” (Valentinus, Fragment F, Layton) then how are we to be confident  that, in ages to come, one of us will not give birth to another damned  cosmos, just as Sophia had done?
 b. Christian Gnosticism
The Christian idea that God has sent his only “Son” (the Logos)  to suffer and die for the sins of all humankind, and so make possible the  salvation of all, had a deep impact on Gnostic thought. In the extensive  and important collection of Gnostic writings discovered at Nag Hammadi,  Egypt in 1945, only a handful present the possibility of having originated  in a pre-Christian, mostly Hellenistic Jewish milieu. The majority of these  texts are Christian Gnostic writings from the early second to late third  centuries CE, and perhaps a bit later. When we consider the notion of salvation  and its meaning for the early Gnostics, who stressed the creative aspect  of our post-salvific existence, we are struck by the bold assertion that  our need for salvation arose, in the first place, from an error committed  by a divine being, Sophia (Wisdom), during the course of her own creative  act (cf. Apocryphon of John [Codex II] 9:25-10:6). Since this is  the case, how, we are led to ask, will our post-salvation existence be  any less prone to error or ignorance, even evil? The radical message of  early Christianity provided the answer to this problematical question;  and so the Gnostics took up the Christian idea and transformed it, by the  power of their singular mytho-logical technique, into a philosophically  and theologically complex speculative schema.
 i. Basilides
The Christian philosopher Basilides of Alexandria (fl. 132-135  CE) developed a cosmology and cosmogony quite distinct from the Sophia  myth of classical Gnosticism, and also reinterpreted key Christian concepts  by way of the popular Stoic philosophy of the era. Basilides began his  system with a “primal octet” consisting of the “unengendered parent” or  Father; Intellect (nous); the “ordering principle” or “Word” (logos);  “prudence” (phronêsis); Wisdom (sophia); Power (dunamis)  (Irenaeus, Against Heresies 1.24.3, in Layton, The Gnostic Scriptures 1987)  and “justice” and “peace” (Basilides, Fragment A, Layton). Through the  union of Wisdom and Power, a group of angelic rulers came into existence,  and from these rulers a total of 365 heavens or aeons were generated  (Irenaeus 1.24.3). Each heaven had its own chief ruler (arkhôn),  and numerous lesser angels. The final heaven, which Basilides claimed is  the realm of matter in which we all dwell, was said by him to be ruled  by “the god of the Jews,” who favored the Jewish nation over all others,  and so caused all manner of strife for the nations that came into contact  with them—as well as for the Jewish people themselves. This behavior  caused the rulers of the other 364 heavens to oppose the god of the Jews,  and to send a savior, Jesus Christ, from the highest realm of the Father,  to rescue the human beings who are struggling under the yoke of this jealous  god (Irenaeus 1.24.4). Since the realm of matter is the sole provenance  of this spiteful god, Basilides finds nothing of value in it, and states  that “[s]alvation belongs only to the soul; the body is by nature corruptible”  (Irenaeus 1.24.5). He even goes so far as to declare, contra Christian  orthodoxy, that Christ’s death on the cross was only apparent, and did  not actually occur “in the flesh” (Irenaeus 1.24.4)—this doctrine came  to be called  docetism.
The notion that material existence is the product of a jealous and corrupt  creator god, who favors one race over all others, is really the “mythical”  expression of a deeply rooted ethical belief that the source of  all evil is material or bodily existence. Indeed, Basilides goes so far  as to assert that sin is the direct outcome of bodily existence, and that  human suffering is the punishment either for actual sins committed, or  even just for the general inclination to sin, which arises from the bodily  impulses (cf. Fragments F and G). In an adaptation of Stoic ethical categories,  Basilides declares that faith (pistis) “is not the rational  assent of a soul possessing free will” (Fragment C); rather, faith is the  natural mode of existence, and consequently, anyone living in accordance  with the “law of nature” (pronoia), which Basilides calls the “kingdom,”  will remain free from the bodily impulses, and exist in a state of “salvation”  (Fragment C). However, Basilides goes beyond simple Stoic doctrine in his  belief that the “elect,” that is, those who exist by faith, “are alien to  the world, as if they were transcendent by nature” (Fragment E); for unlike  the Stoics, who believed in a single, material cosmos, Basilides held the  view, as we have seen, that the cosmos is composed of numerous heavens,  with the material realm as the final heaven, and consequently corrupt.  Since this final heaven represents the “last gasp” of divine emanation,  as it were, and is by no means a perfect image of true divinity, adherence  to its laws can lead to no good. Further, since the body is the means by  which the ruler of this material cosmos enforces his law, freedom can only  be attained by abandoning or “becoming indifferent to” all bodily impulses  and desires. This indifference (adiaphoria) to bodily impulses,  however, does not lead to a simple stagnant asceticism. Basilides does  not call upon his hearers to abandon the material realm only to dissolve  into negativity; instead, he offers them a new life, by appealing to the  grand hierarchy of rulers persisting above the material realm (cf. Fragment  D). When one turns to the greater hierarchy of Being, there results a “creation  of good things” (Fragment C, translation modified). Love and personal creation—the begetting of the Good—are the final result of Basilides’ vaguely  dialectical system, and for this reason it is one of the most important  early expressions of a truly Christian, if not “orthodox,” philosophy.
 ii. Marcion
Marcion of Sinope, in Pontus, was a contemporary of Basilides.  According to Tertullian, he started his career as an orthodox Christian—whatever that meant at such an early stage of development of Christian  doctrine—but soon formulated the remarkable and radical doctrine that  was to lead to his excommunication from the Roman Church in July 144 CE,  the traditional date of the founding of the Marcionite Church (Tertullian,  Against  Marcion 1.1; cf. Kurt Rudolph, Gnosis 1984, p. 314). The teaching  of Marcion is elegantly simple: “the God proclaimed by the law and the  prophets is not the Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ. The God (of the Old  Testament) is known, but the latter (the Father of Jesus Christ) is unknown.  The one is just, but the other is good” (Irenaeus 1.27.1). Marcion believed  that this cosmos in which we live bears witness to the existence of an  inflexible, legalistic, and sometimes spiteful and vengeful God. This view  arose from a quite literal reading of the Old Testament, which does contain  several passages describing God in terms not quite conducive to divinity—or at least to the idea of the divine that was current in the Hellenistic  era. Marcion then, following Paul (in Romans 1:20) declared that God is  knowable through His creation; however, unlike Paul, Marcion did not take  this “natural revelation” as evidence of God’s singularity and goodness.  Quite the contrary, Marcion believed that he knew the God of this realm  all too well, and that He was not worthy of the devotion and obedience  that He demanded. Therefore, Marcion rejected the teaching of the orthodox  Christian Church of his era, that Yahweh (or Jehovah) is the Father of  Christ, and, through a creative excision of what he termed “Judaistic interpolations”  in Luke and ten Pauline Epistles, Marcion simultaneously put forth his  notion of the “alien God” and His act of salvation, and established the  first Canon of Scripture used in a “Christian” Church (Jonas, pp. 145-146).
Marcion was not a philosopher in the sense that term has come to imply.  He never developed, as far as we can tell from the surviving evidence,  a systematic metaphysical, cosmological, or anthropological theory in the  manner of a Basilides or a Valentinus (whom we shall discuss below), nor  did he appeal to history as a witness for his doctrines. This latter point  is the most important. Unlike the majority of Gnostics, who elaborated  some sort of divine genealogy (e.g., the Sophia myth) to account for the  presence of corruption and strife in the world, Marcion simply posited  two opposed and irreducible Gods: the biblical god, and the unknown or  “alien” God, who is the Father of Christ. According to Marcion, the god  who controls this realm is a being who is intent on preserving his autonomy  and power even at the expense of the (human) beings whom he created. The  “alien” God, who is the Supremely Good, is a “god of injection,” for he  enters this realm from outside, in order to gratuitously adopt the pitiful  human beings who remain under the sway of the inferior god as His own children.  This act is the origin of and reason for the Incarnation of Christ, according  to Marcion.
In spite of the absence of any solid philosophical or theological foundation  for this rather simple formulation, Marcion’s idea nevertheless expresses,  in a somewhat crude and immediate form, a basic truth of human existence:  that the desires of the Mind are incommensurable with the nature of  material existence (cf. Irenaeus 1.27.2-3). Yet, if we follow Marcion’s  argument to its logical (or perhaps “anti-logical”) conclusion, we discover  an existential expression (not a philosophy) of the primal feeling of “abandonment”  (Geworfenheit). This expression plays upon the subtle yet poignant  opposition of “love of wisdom” (philosophia) and “complete wisdom”  (plêrosophia). We are alone in a world that does not lend  itself to our quest for unalterable truth, and so we befriend wisdom, which  is the way of or manner in which we attain this intuited truth. According  to Marcion, this truth is not to be found in this world—all that is  to be found is the desire for this truth, which arises amongst human  beings. However, since this desire, on the part of human beings, only produces  various philosophies, none of which can hold claim to the absolute truth,  Marcion concludes that the  noetic beings (humans) of this realm  are capable of nothing more than a shadow of wisdom. It is only by way  of the guidance and grace of an alien and purely good God that humankind  will rise to the level of  plêrosophia or complete wisdom (cf.  Colossians 2:2 ff.). Moreover, instead of attempting to discover the historical  connection between the revelation of Christ and the teachings of the Old  Testament, Marcion simply rejected the latter in favor of the former, on  the belief that only the Gospel (thoughtfully edited by Marcion himself)  points us toward complete wisdom (Irenaeus 1.27.2-3; Tertullian, Against  Marcion 4.3).
While other Christian thinkers of the era were busy allegorizing the  Old Testament in order to bring it into line with New Testament teaching,  Marcion allowed the New Testament (albeit in his own special version) to  speak to him as a singular voice of authority—and he formulated his  doctrine accordingly. This doctrine emphasized not only humankind’s radical  alienation from the realm of their birth, but also their lack of any genealogical  relation to the God who sacrificed His own Son to save them—in other  words, Marcion painted a picture of humanity as a race displaced, with  no true home at all (cf. Giovanni Filoramo, A History of Gnosticism 1992, p. 164). The hope of searching for a lost home, or of returning to  a home from which one has been turned out, was absent in the doctrine of  Marcion. Like Pico della Mirandola, Marcion declared the nature of humankind  to be that of an eternally intermediate entity, poised precariously between  heaven and earth (cp. Pico della Mirandola, Oration on the Dignity of  Man, 3). However, unlike Pico, Marcion called for a radical displacement  of humankind—a “rupture”—in which humanity would awaken to its full  (if not innate) possibilities.
 iii. Valentinus and the Valentinian School
The great Christian teacher and philosopher Valentinus (ca. 100-175  CE) spent his formative years in Alexandria, where he probably came into  contact with Basilides. Valentinus later went to Rome, where he began his  public teaching career, which was so successful that he actually had a  serious chance of being elected Bishop of Rome. He lost the election, however,  and with it Gnosticism lost the chance of becoming synonymous with Christianity,  and hence a world religion. This is not to say that Valentinus failed to  influence the development of Christian theology—he most certainly did,  as we shall see below.  It was through Valentinus, perhaps more than  any other Christian thinker of his time, that Platonic philosophy, rhetorical  elegance, and a deep, interpretive knowledge of scripture became introduced  together into the realm of Christian theology. The achievement of Valentinus  remained unmatched for nearly a century, until the incomparable Origen  came on the scene. Yet even then, it may not be amiss to suggest that Origen  never would have “happened” had it not been for the example of Valentinus.
The cosmology of Valentinus began, not with a unity, but with a primal  duality, a dyad, composed of two entities called “the Ineffable”  and “Silence.” From these initial beings a second dyad of “Parent” and  “Truth” was generated. These beings finally engendered a quaternity of  “Word” (logos), “Life” (zôê), “Human Being” (anthropos),  and “Church” (ekklêsia). Valentinus refers to this divine  collectivity as the “first octet” (Irenaeus 1.11.1). This octet produced  several other beings, one of which revolted or “turned away,” as Irenaeus  tells us, and set in motion the divine drama that would eventually produce  the cosmos. According to Irenaeus, who was writing only about five years  after the death of Valentinus, and in whose treatise Against Heresies the outline of Valentinus’ cosmology is preserved, the entity responsible  for initiating the drama is referred to simply as “the mother,” by which  is probably meant Sophia (Wisdom). From this “mother” both matter  (hulê) and the savior, Christ, were generated. The realm of  matter is described as a “shadow,” produced from the “mother,” and from  which Christ distanced himself and “hastened up into the fullness” (Irenaeus  1.11.1; cp. Poimandres 5). At this point the “mother” produced another  “child,” the “craftsman” (dêmiourgos) responsible for the  creation of the cosmos. In the account preserved by Irenaeus, we are told  nothing of any cosmic drama in which “divine sparks” are trapped in fleshly  bodies through the designs of the Demiurge. However, it is to be assumed  that Valentinus did expound an anthropology similar to that of the classical  Sophia myth (as represented, for example, in the  Apocryphon of John;  cf. also The Hypostasis of the Archons, and the Apocalypse of  Adam), especially since his school, as represented most significantly  by his star pupil Ptolemy (see below), came to develop a highly complex  anthropological myth that must have grown out of a simpler model provided  by Valentinus himself. The account preserved in Irenaeus ends with a description  of a somewhat confused doctrine of a heavenly and an earthly Christ, and  a brief passage on the role of the Holy Spirit (Irenaeus 1.11.1). From  this one gets the idea that Valentinus was flirting with a primitive doctrine  of the Trinity. Indeed, according to the fourth century theologian Marcellus  of Ancyra, Valentinus was “the first to devise the notion of three subsistent  entities (hypostases), in a work that he entitled On the Three Natures”  (Valentinus, Fragment B, Layton).
Valentinus was certainly the most overtly Christian of the Gnostic philosophers  of his era. We have seen how the thought of Basilides was pervaded by a  Stoicizing tendency, and how Marcion felt the need to go beyond scripture  to posit an “alien” redeemer God. Valentinus, on the other hand, seems  to have been informed, in his speculations, primarily by Jewish and Christian  scripture and exegesis, and only secondarily by “pagan” philosophy, particularly  Platonism. This is most pronounced in his particular version of the familiar  theological notion of “election” or “pre-destination,” in which it is declared  (following Paul in Romans 8:29) that God chose certain individuals, before  the beginning of time, for salvation. Valentinus writes, in what is probably  a remnant of a sermon:
From the beginning you [the “elect” or Gnostic Christians]  have been immortal, and you are children of eternal life. And you wanted  death to be allocated to yourselves so that you might spend it and use  it up, and that death might die in you and through you. For when you nullify  the world and are not yourselves annihilated, you are lord over creation  and all corruption (Valentinus, Fragment F).
This seems to be Valentinus’ response to the dilemma of the permanence  of salvation: since Sophia or the divine “mother,” a member of the Pleroma,  had fallen into error, how can we be sure that we will not make the same  or a similar mistake after we have reached the fullness? By declaring that  it is the role and task of the “elect” or Gnostic Christian to use up death  and nullify the world, Valentinus is making clear his position that these  elite souls are fellow saviors of the world, along with Jesus, who was  the first to take on the sin and corruption inherent in the material realm  (cf. Irenaeus 1.11.1; and Layton p. 240). Therefore, since “the wages of  sin is death” (Romans 6:23), any being who is capable of destroying death  must be incapable of sin. For Valentinus, then, the individual who is predestined  for salvation is also predestined for a sort of divine stewardship that  involves an active hand in history, and not a mere repose with God, or  even a blissful existence of loving creation, as Basilides held. Like Paul,  Valentinus demanded that his hearers recognize their createdness.  However, unlike Paul, they recognized their creator as the “Ineffable Parent,”  and not as the God of the Hebrew Scriptures. The task of Christian hermeneutics  after Valentinus was to prove the continuity of the Old and New Testament.  In this regard, as well as in the general spirituality of his teaching—not to mention his primitive trinitarian doctrine—Valentinus had  an incalculable impact on the development of Christianity.
 1) The System of Ptolemy
Ptolemy (or Ptolemaeus, fl. 140 CE) was described by St.  Irenaeus as “the blossom of Valentinus’ school” (Layton, p. 276). We know  next to nothing about his life, except the two writings that have come  down to us: the elaborate Valentinian philosophical myth preserved in Irenaeus,  and Ptolemy’s Epistle to Flora, preserved verbatim by St. Epiphanius.  In the former we are met with a grand elaboration, by Ptolemy, of Valentinus’  own system, which contains a complex anthropological myth centering around  the passion of Sophia. We also find, in both the myth and the Epistle,  Ptolemy making an attempt to bring Hebrew Scripture into line with Gnostic  teaching and New Testament allegorization in a manner heretofore unprecedented  among the Gnostics.
In the system of Ptolemy we are explicitly told that the cause of Sophia’s  fall was her desire to know the ineffable Father. Since the purpose of  the Father’s generating of the Aeons (of which Sophia was the last) was  to “elevate all of them into thought” (Irenaeus 1.2.1) it was not permitted  for any Aeon to attain a full knowledge of the Father. The purpose of the  Pleroma was to exist as a living, collective expression of the intellectual  magnitude of the Father, and if any single being within the Pleroma were  to attain to the Father, all life would cease. This idea is based on an  essentially positive attitude toward existence—that is, existence understood  in the sense of striving, not for a reposeful end, but for an ever-increasing  degree of creative or “constitutive” insight. The goal, on this view, is  to produce through wisdom, and not simply to attain wisdom as an object or end in itself. Such an existence is not characterized by desire for  an object, but rather by desire for the ability to persist in creative,  constitutive engagement with/in one’s own “circumstance” (circumscribed  stance or individual arena). When Sophia desired to know the Father, then, what  she was desiring was her own dissolution in favor of an envelopment in  that which made her existence possible in the first place. This amounted  to a rejection of the gift of the Father—that is, of the gift of individual  existence and life. It is for this reason that Sophia was not permitted  to know the Father, but was turned back by the “boundary” (horos)  that separates the Pleroma from the “ineffable magnitude” of the Father  (Irenaeus 1.2.2).
The remainder of Ptolemy’s account is concerned with the production  of the material cosmos out of the hypostatized “passions” of Sophia, and  the activity of the Savior (Jesus Christ) in arranging these initially  chaotic passions into a structured hierarchy of existents (Irenaeus 1.4.5  ff., and cp. Colossians 1:16). Three classes of human beings come into  existence through this arrangement: the “material” (hulikos), the  “animate” (psukhikos), and the “spiritual” (pneumatikos).  The “material” humans are those who have not attained to intellectual life,  and so place their hopes only upon that which is perishable—for these  there is no hope of salvation. The “animate” are those who have only a  half-formed conception of the true God, and so must live a life devoted  to holy works, and persistence in faith; according to Ptolemy, these are  the “ordinary” Christians. Finally, there are the “spiritual” humans, the  Gnostics, who need no faith, since they have actual knowledge (gnôsis)  of intellectual reality, and are thus saved by nature (Irenaeus 1.6.2,  1.6.4). The Valentinian-Ptolemaic notion of salvation rests on the idea  that the cosmos is the concrete manifestation or hypostatization of the  desire of Sophia for knowledge of the Father, and the “passions” her failure  produced. The history of salvation, then, for human beings, has the character  of an external manifestation of the threefold process of Sophia’s own redemption:  recognition of her passion; her consequent “turning back” (epistrophê);  and finally, her act of spiritual production, whence arose Gnostic humanity  (cf. Irenaeus 1.5.1). Salvation, then, in its final form, must imply a  sort of spiritual creation on the part of the Gnostics who attain the Pleroma.  The “animate” humans, however, who are composed partly of corruptible matter  and partly of the spiritual essence, must remain content with a simple  restful existence with the craftsman of the cosmos, since no material element  can enter the Pleroma (Irenaeus 1.7.1).
In his Epistle to Flora (in Epiphanius 33.3.1-33.7.10), which  is an attempt to convert an “ordinary” Christian woman to his brand of  Valentinian Christianity, Ptolemy clearly formulates his doctrine of the  relation between the God of the Hebrew Scriptures, who is merely “just,”  and the Ineffable Father, who is the Supreme Good. Rather than simply declaring  these two gods to be unrelated, as did Marcion, Ptolemy develops a complex,  allegorical reading of the Hebrew Scriptures in relation to the New Testament  in order to establish a genealogy connecting the Pleroma, Sophia and her  “passion,” the Demiurge, and the salvific activity of Jesus Christ. The  scope and rigor of Ptolemy’s work, and the influence it came to exercise  on emerging Christian orthodoxy, qualifies him as one of the most important  of the early Christian theologians, both proto-orthodox and “heretical.”
 c. Mani and Manichaeism
The world religion founded by Mani (216-276 CE) and known to  history as Manichaeism has its roots in the East, borrowing elements from  Persian dualistic religion (Zoroastrianism), Jewish Christianity, Buddhism,  and even Mithraism. The system developed by Mani was self-consciously syncretistic,  which was a natural outgrowth of his desire to see his religion reach the  ends of the earth. This desire was fulfilled, and until the late Middle  Ages, Manichaeism remained a world religion, stretching from China to Western  Europe. It is now completely extinct. The religion began when its founder  experienced a series of visions, in which the Holy Spirit supposedly appeared  to him, ordering him to preach the revelation of Light to the ends of the  earth. Mani came to view himself as the last in a series of great prophets  including Buddha, Zoroaster, Jesus, and Paul (Rudolph, p. 339). His highly  complex myth of the origin of the cosmos and of humankind drew on various  elements culled from these several traditions and teachings. The doctrine  of Mani is not “philosophical,” in the manner of Basilides, Valentinus  or Ptolemy; for Mani’s teaching was not the product of a more or less rational  or systematic speculation about the godhead, resulting in Gnosis, but the  wholly creative product of what he felt to be a revelation from the divinity  itself. It is for this reason that Mani’s followers revered him as the  redeemer and holy teacher of humankind (Rudolph, p. 339). Since Manichaeism  belongs more to the history of religion than to philosophy proper (or even  the fringes of philosophy, as does Western Gnosticism), it will suffice  to say only a few words about the system, if for no other reason than that  the great Christian philosopher Augustine of Hippo had followed the Manichaen  religion for several years, before converting to Christianity (cf. Augustine,  Confessions III.10).
The main point of distinction between the doctrine of Mani and the Western  branch of Gnosticism (Basilides, Valentinus, etc.),  is that in Manichaeism  the “cosmology is subservient to the soteriology” (Rudolph, p. 336). This  means, essentially, that Mani began with a fundamental belief about the  nature of humanity and its place in the cosmos, and concocted a myth to  explain the situation of humankind, and the dynamics of humanity’s eventual  salvation. The details of the cosmology were apparently not important,  their sole purpose being to illustrate, poetically, the dangers facing  the souls dwelling in this “realm of darkness” as well as the manner of  their redemption from this place. The Manichaean cosmology began with two  opposed first principles, as in Zoroastrianism: the God of Light, and the  Ruler of Darkness. This Darkness, being of a chaotic nature, assails the  “Kingdom of Light” in an attempt to overthrow or perhaps assimilate it.  The “King of the Paradise of Light,” then, goes on the defensive, as it  were, and brings forth Wisdom, who in her turn gives birth to the Primal  Man, also called Ohrmazd (or Ahura-Mazda). This Primal Man possesses a  pentadic soul, consisting of fire, water, wind, light, and ether. Armored  with this soul, the Primal Man descends into the Realm of Darkness to battle  with its Ruler. Surprisingly, the Primal Man is defeated, and his soul  scattered throughout the Realm of Darkness. However, the Manichaeans understood  this as a plan on the part of the Ruler of Light to sow the seeds of resistance  within the Darkness, making possible the eventual overthrow of the chaotic  realm. To this end, a second “Living Spirit” is brought forth, who was  also called Mithra. This being, and his partner, “Light-Adamas,” set in  motion the history of salvation by putting forth the “call” within the  realm of darkness, which recalls the scattered particles of light (from  the vanquished soul of Ohrmazd). These scattered particles “answer” Mithra,  and the result is the formation of the heavens and earth, the stars and  planets, and finally, the establishment of the twelve signs of the zodiac  and the ordered revolution of the cosmic sphere, through which, by a gradual  process, the scattered particles of light will eventually be returned to  the Realm of Light. The Manichaeans believed that these particles ascend  to the moon, and that when the moon is full, it empties these particles  into the sun, from whence they ascend to the “new Aeon,” also identified  with Mithra, the “Living Spirit” (Rudolph, pp. 336-337). This process will  continue throughout the ages of the world, until all the particles eventually  reach their proper home and the salvation of the godhead is complete.
It should be clear from this brief exposition that humanity as such  does not hold the prime place in the salvific drama of Manichaeism, but  rather a part of the godhead itself—that is, the scattered soul of Ohrmazd.  The purpose of humanity in this scheme is to aid the particles of light  in their ascent to the godhead. Of course, these particles dwell within  every living thing, and so the salvation of these particles is the salvation  of humanity, but only by default, as it were; humanity does not hold a  privileged position in Manichaeism, as it does in the Western or strictly  Christian Gnostic schools. This belief led the Manichaeans to establish  strict dietary and purity laws, and even to require selected members of  their church to provide meals for the “Elect,” so that the latter would  not become defiled by harming anything containing light particles. All  of this, however, is a long way from philosophy. Hans Jonas was right to  describe Manichaeism as representing “a more archaic level of gnostic thought”  (Jonas, p. 206). Now that we have examined one of the non-philosophical  directions taken by Gnostic thought, let us proceed to discuss its role  in the philosophical development of the era.
 3. Platonism and Gnosticism
Long before the advent of Gnosticism, Plato had posited two contrary  World Souls: one “which does good” and one “which has the opposite capacity”  (Plato, Laws X. 896e, tr. Saunders).  For Plato, this did not  imply that the cosmos is under the control of a corrupt or ignorant god,  as it did for the Gnostics, but simply that this cosmos, like the human  soul, possesses a rational and an irrational part, and that it is the task  of the rational part to govern the irrational. The question arose, however,  among Platonists, regarding Plato’s true position on this matter.  Was he declaring that a part of the cosmos is evil? or that the divine  Demiurge (who, in the highly influential Timaeus account, is said  to have crafted the cosmos) actually produced an evil soul? Both of these  conjectures flew in the face of everything that the ancient thinkers believed  about the cosmos—that is, that it was divine, orderly, and perfect. A common  solution, among both Platonists and Pythagoreans, was to interpret the  second or “evil” Soul as Matter, that is, the material or generative principle,  which is the opposite of the truly divine and unchanging Forms. The purpose  of the Intellectual principle, or the “good” Soul, is to bring this disorderly  principle under the control of reason, and thereby maintain an everlasting  but not eternal cosmos (cf. Timaeus 37d). Since the cosmos,  according to Plato in the Timaeus, cannot be as perfect as the eternal  image upon which it is founded, a generative principle is necessary to  maintain the “living creature” (which is precisely how the cosmos is described),  and therefore not really “evil,” even though it possesses the “opposite  capacity” (generation, and hence, corruption) from that of the Good or  Rational Soul.
 a. Numenius of Apamea and Neo-Platonism
Several centuries after Plato, around the time when the great Gnostic  thinkers like Valentinus and Ptolemy were developing their systems, we  encounter the Platonic philosopher Numenius of Apamea (fl. 150 CE).  The main ideas of Numenius’ philosophy, preserved in the fragments of his  writings that survive, bear clear traces of Gnostic influence. His cosmology  describes, in language strikingly similar to that of the Gnostics, the  degradation of the divine dêmiourgos upon his contact with  pre-existent Matter (hulê, or the “indefinite” principle):
[I]n the process of coming into contact with Matter, which  is the Dyad, [the Demiurge] gives unity to it, but is Himself divided by  it, since Matter has a character prone to desire [epithumêtikon  êthos] and is in flux. So in virtue of not being in contact with  the Intelligible (which would mean being turned in upon Himself), by reason  of looking towards Matter and taking thought for it, He becomes unregarding  (aperioptos) of Himself. And he seizes upon the sense realm and  ministers to it and yet draws it up to His own character, as a result of  this yearning towards Matter [eporexamenos tês hulês]  (Numenius, Fragment 11, in Dillon 1977, The Middle Platonists, pp.  367-368).
In this fragment, Numenius is transferring a basic Gnostic anthropological  idea into the realm of cosmology. It is a common feature of Gnostic systems  to describe the individual human soul’s contact with the material realm  as resulting in a forgetting of the soul’s true origin. Platonism, also,  warned against the soul’s becoming too attached to the realm of the senses,  since this realm is changing and illusory, and does not accurately reflect  the divinity. However, neither Platonism nor Gnosticism described such  a danger as affecting, in any way, the Demiurge; for the Gnostics declared  the Demiurge to be just as much a part of the cosmos as he was its  ruler,  and the orthodox Platonists located the Demiurge outside the cosmos, declaring  the cosmos to be self-sufficient (following Timaeus 34b). Numenius,  however, went further and bridged the gap between the sensible cosmos and  the Intelligible Realm by linking the Demiurge to the latter by way of  contemplation, and to the former by way of his “desire” (orexis)  for matter. In Fragment 18, Numenius tells us that the Demiurge derives  his “critical faculty” (kritikon) from his contemplation of the  Good, and his “impulsive faculty” (hormêtikon) from his attachment  to Matter (Dillon, p. 370). This idea seems to foreshadow Plotinus’ doctrine  that the individual soul will always take on certain characteristics of  Matter, and that these characteristics manifest themselves in the form  of sense perceptions that must be brought under the controlling influence  of rational judgment (cf. Enneads I.8.9 and I.1.7). Unlike Plotinus,  however, who leaves the World-Soul or active part of the Demiurge safely  beyond the affective cosmic realm, Numenius posits a Demiurge that is both  transcendent and immanent, and arrives at a doctrine of a cosmos that,  even on the highest level—the level of the celestial bodies—is not  devoid of evil influence, since even the Demiurge, the highest cosmic deity,  is infected by the tainting influence of Matter. “This importation of evil  into the celestial realm is surely more Gnostic than Platonist, and did  not comment itself to such successors as Plotinus or Porphyry, though it  does seem to be accepted by Iamblichus” (Dillon, p. 374).
Plotinus, during the height of his teaching career at Rome (ca. 255  CE), composed a treatise “Against Those Who Declare the Creator of This  World, and the World Itself, to be Evil,” also known, simply, as “Against  the Gnostics” (Ennead II.9) in which he argues for the divinity  and goodness of the cosmos, and upholds the ancient Greek belief in the  divinity of the stars and planets, declaring them to be our “noble brethren,”  and responsible only for the good things that befall humankind. Porphyry,  in his Life of Plotinus, tells us that Plotinus commissioned him,  along with his fellow student Amelius, to write more treatises attacking  the Gnostics on points that Plotinus skipped over (Porphyry, Life of  Plotinus 16). Porphyry also mentions by name two Gnostic treatises  that were discovered in Egypt in 1945, and are now readily available to  scholars: Zostrianos, and Allogenes, in the Nag Hammadi Collection  of Codices.  These texts, as well as the Tripartite Tractate (also in the Nag Hammadi Collection) show how tightly Platonism and Gnosticism  were intertwined in the early centuries of our era.
 4. Concluding Summary
Gnosticism began with the same basic, pre-philosophical intuition that  guided the development of Greek philosophy—that there is a dichotomy  between the realm of true, unchanging Being, and ever-changing Becoming.  However, unlike the Greeks, who strived to find the connection between  and overall unity of these two “realms,” the Gnostics amplified the differences,  and developed a mytho-logical doctrine of humankind’s origin in the realm  of Being, and eventual fall into the realm of darkness or matter, that is,  Becoming. This general Gnostic myth came to exercise an influence on emerging  Christianity, as well as upon Platonic philosophy, and even, in the East,  developed into a world religion (Manichaeism) that spread across the known  world, surviving until the late Middle Ages. In the twentieth century,  there began a renewed interest in Gnostic ideas, particularly in the pioneering  work of Hans Jonas, the Existentialist philosopher and student of Martin  Heidegger. The psychologist Carl Jung, as well, drew upon Gnostic motifs  in his theoretical work, and the increasing emphasis on Hermeneutics in  late twentieth century thought owes something to the analyses of Gnostic  myth and exegesis done by Harold Bloom, Paul Ricoeur, and others.
More than any of these accomplishments, however, it was the discovery  in 1945, in Egypt, of a large collection of Coptic Gnostic codices, now  known as the Nag Hammadi Collection, or the Nag Hammadi Library. This collection  contains works of the Valentinian School, as well as of many earlier and  contemporaneous sects, and sheds much needed light on the nature and structure  of what to this day is still called, with some reservations, the Gnostic  Religion.  The study of this library has led certain scholars to question  the existence of any unified movement called “Gnosticism” or the “Gnostic  Religion.” Michael Allen Williams, in 1996, published a book entitled Rethinking  “Gnosticism”: An Argument For Dismantling A Dubious Category (Princeton  University Press 1996). Through a detailed study of numerous texts of the  Nag Hammadi Collection, Williams attempts to show that the extreme diversity  underlying the texts that many scholars have lumped together under the  catch-all phrase of “Gnosticism,” casts doubt on the existence of anything  like a Gnostic religion. Moreover, he argues, such a wholesale consignment  of these texts to what is, in fact, a modern designation, blinds us to  the deeper meaning of these diverse intellectual monuments. It should be  noted, however, that the early Church Fathers, like Clement of Alexandria,  Irenaeus, Origen, Hippolytus, Epiphanius, and even “pagan” philosophers  like Plotinus and Porphyry, who have preserved for us accounts and occasionally  some original documents of philosophers and theologians whom they term  “Gnostic,” were also contemporaries or near contemporaries of many of the  figures and schools that they criticize and interpret. The insights of  these writers, then, who were living and working side by side, and almost  always in conflict with, members of the Gnostic sects, should be given  priority over any modern attempts to revise our understanding of what Gnosticism  is.
 5. References and Further Reading
 a. Sources

Dillon, John (1977). “Numenius of Apamea” in The Middle Platonists (Cornell University Press).
Filoramo, Giovanni. A History of Gnosticism, tr. Anthony Alcock  (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers 1990, 1992).
Hegel, G.W.F. “The Gnostics” in Lectures on the History of Philosophy,  vol 2. “Plato and the Platonists,” tr. E.S. Haldane and Frances H. Simson  (University of Nebraska Press; Bison Books Edition 1995).
Jonas, Hans (1958, 2001). The Gnostic Religion: The Message of the  Alien God and the Beginnings of Christianity (Boston: Beacon Press).
Layton, Bentley (1987). The Gnostic Scriptures (Doubleday: The  Anchor Bible Reference Library).
Plato. Laws, tr. Trevor J. Saunders, in Plato: Complete Works,  ed. John M. Cooper (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing 1997).
Plato. Timaeus, tr. Donald J. Zeyl, in Plato: Complete Works.
Plotinus. The Enneads, tr. A.H. Armstrong, in 7 volumes (Harvard:  Loeb Classical Library 1966).
Ricoeur, Paul. The Conflict of Interpretations (Northwestern  University Press 1974).
Rudolph, Kurt. Gnosis: The Nature and History of Gnosticism,  tr. Robert McLachlan Wilson (Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark Ltd. 1984).
Segal, Robert A. (ed.) The Gnostic Jung (Princeton University  Press 1992).

 b. Suggestions for Further Reading

Barnstone, Willis (1984 ed.) The Other Bible (Harper San Francisco).
Bultmann, Rudolph (1956). Primitive Christianity in its Contemporary  Setting (New York: Meridian Books).
Fideler, David (1993). Jesus Christ, Sun of God: Ancient Cosmology  and Early Christian Symbolism (Wheaton, Illinois: Quest Books).
Pagels, Elaine (1975). The Gnostic Paul: Gnostic Exegesis of the  Pauline Letters (Philadelphia: Trinity Press).
Williams, Michael Allen. Rethinking “Gnosticism”: An Argument For  Dismantling A Dubious Category (Princeton University Press 1996).

Author Information
Edward Moore
Email: emoore@theandros.com
St. Elias School of Orthodox Theology
U. s. A.





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







