








Beattie, James | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

































 












Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Search


Primary Menu
Skip to content
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
 














James Beattie (1735—1803)
James  Beattie was a Scottish philosopher and poet who spent his  entire academic career as Professor of Moral Philosophy and Logic at Marischal College in Aberdeen. His best known philosophical work, An  Essay on The Nature and Immutability of Truth In Opposition to  Sophistry and Scepticism (1770), is a rhetorical tour de force  which affirmed the sovereignty of common sense while attacking David Hume (1711-1776). A smash bestseller in its day, this Essay  on Truth made Beattie very famous  and Hume very angry.	The  work’s fame proved fleeting, as did Beattie’s  philosophical reputation.
While the Essay on Truth is little  read today, it is well worth reading. First, it is an  important document in the history of the Scottish common sense school  of philosophy inaugurated by Beattie’s colleague, Thomas Reid  (1710-1796). Second, Beattie’s style– lively, polished, pure,  and lucid–still has the power to please and charm. Finally, Beattie  is an abler philosopher than his vociferous detractors were willing  to allow. Though by no means an original or profound thinker, he can  and should be given credit for presenting a systematic and accessible  defense of a simple-sounding thesis – that philosophy cannot afford  to despise the plain dictates of common sense.
This  article (1) outlines Beattie’s life and career, (2)  reviews the basic argument of the Essay on Truth, (3)  summarizes the Essay‘s neglected critique of Hume’s  racism, (4) briefly describes Beattie’s later Elements  of Moral Science, and (5) reflects on Beattie’s  place in the Scottish common sense school.
Table of Contents

Life and Career 
The Essay on Truth (1770) 
Beattie Contra Hume on Racism 
Elements of Moral Science (1790-1793) 
Beattie and Scottish Common Sense Philosophy 
References and Further Reading

 1. Life and Career
James Beattie was born October 25, 1735 in Laurencekirk, Kincardineshire, where his father was a farmer and shopkeeper. In 1749 Beattie began his studies at Marischal College, Aberdeen. In 1753, he was awarded the MA degree. He then spent several years as a schoolteacher and briefly contemplated becoming a minister. During this period he also secured the friendship of several influential personages. One of Beattie’s early patrons was James Burnett (1714-1799), better known to posterity as Lord Monboddo (which name Burnett assumed when appointed to the Court of Session in 1767).
In  1760, at the tender age of 25, Beattie was installed as Professor of  Moral Philosophy and Logic at Marischal College. Shortly thereafter  he was elected to the Aberdeen Philosophical Society, known to  waggish locals as “the Wise Club.” Founded in 1758 by  Thomas Reid (1710-1796) and John Gregory (1724-1773), the Society  continued to hold meetings until 1773, nine years after Reid left for  Glasgow to fill the Chair of Moral Philosophy vacated by Adam Smith  (1723-1790). Much of Beattie’s later work had its origin in  compositions read to his fellow Aberdonian “wise men” in  the 1760s.
A  decade after taking up his Professorship at Aberdeen, Beattie  published the philosophical work for which he was (and is still) best  known: An Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth In  Opposition to Sophistry and Scepticism (1770) (hereinafter “Essay  on Truth”). The honors piled up thick and fast: a doctorate  of laws from Oxford; an audience with King George III; a Crown  pension of 200 pounds a year; the approbation of discerning literati such as Edmund Burke and Samuel Johnson; and the opportunity to pose  for Sir Joshua Reynolds. (Incidentally, Reynold’s portrait of  Beattie – “The Triumph of Truth, with the Portrait of a  Gentleman”- was hung in Marischal College.) Nor was enthusiasm  for Beattie’s anti-skeptical treatise confined to the British  Isles. The Essay was soon translated into French, German, and  Dutch and discussed on the Continent. Beattie’s fame spread to  the New World as well. In 1784 he was made a member of the American  Philosophical Society.
Not  all citizens of the Republic of Letters, however, were impressed by  the Essay on Truth. The book’s target, the amiable and  good-humored Hume, was incensed. “Truth!” he fumed,  “there is no truth in it; it is a horrible large lie in  Octavo.” Yet Hume, who had a policy of not answering critics,  never deigned to reply directly to the cavils of “that bigoted  silly fellow Beattie.” Immanuel Kant (1724-1804), too, had  harsh words for Beattie. In Kant’s Prolegomena to Any Future  Metaphysics (1783), the Scottish prophet of common sense is  portrayed as a superficial, obtuse dogmatist: “I should think  that Hume might fairly have laid as much claim to common sense as  Beattie, and in addition to a critical reason (such as the latter did  not possess).” (For the record, however, it should be noted  that Kant (unlike Hume) had an equally low opinion of Reid.)
Beattie  wrote no philosophical work equal to the Essay in appeal or  influence, although he continued to publish throughout the 1770s and  1780s. Many of these ostensibly “later” works (several of  which actually date from the 1760s) are devoted to issues in  aesthetics, rhetoric, and literary theory. They include An Essay  on Poetry and Music (1776), On the Utility of Classical  Learning (1776), An Essay on Laughter, and Ludicrous  Composition (1779), and Dissertations Moral and Critical  (1783). In addition, he compiled a lexicon entitled Scotticisms,  arranged in Alphabetical Order (1787), in which he urged his  educated compatriots to improve their English by “purifying”  it of Scots expressions.
Beattie  also earned plaudits as a poet, largely on the strength of The  Minstrel; or, The Progress of Genius, written in Spenserian  stanzas. The first part of The Minstrel appeared anonymously  in 1771 (a year which also saw two editions of the Essay printed). The second part, to which the author put his name, followed  in 1774. Replete with reflections upon Nature and the character of  poetic genius, The Minstrel anticipates some of the central  preoccupations of the Romantic movement.
Despite  his apparent “aesthetic turn” in the post-Essay period, Beattie remained interested in the broader philosophical,  moral, and religious questions that had originally prompted him to  compose the Essay on Truth in the 1760s. 1786 saw the  publication of Evidences of the Christian Religion Briefly and  Plainly Stated, a two volume work of popular apologetics. This  was followed by his final book, Elements of Moral Science (1790-1793). A lengthy collection of lectures delivered at Marischal  College, the Elements deal with a wide range of topics in the  philosophy of mind, epistemology, metaphysics, logic, ethics,  political philosophy, economics, and natural theology.
Beattie’s  later years were filled with affliction. His wife, Mary Beattie (née Dunn), went mad and was eventually committed to an asylum. Both of  his children died, the elder son in 1790 and the younger in 1796.  Weakened by grief, ill health, and a series of strokes, Beattie died  in Aberdeen on August 18, 1803.
 2. The Essay on Truth (1770)
The  Essay on Truth begins predictably enough, with a definition of  – what else?- truth. Truth, Beattie avows, is identified with  what “the constitution of our nature determines us to believe”;  falsehood is identified with what “the constitution of our  nature determines us to disbelieve.” (Part I. i). The  distinction between common sense and reason is drawn in terms of the  way that distinct classes of truths are apprehended. Common sense is  identified as “that faculty by which we perceive self-evident  truth,” whereas reason is “that power by which we  perceive truth in consequence of a proof.” (I. i). With these  definitions securely in place, Beattie advances the Essay‘s  principal thesis — “common sense is the ultimate judge of  truth,” (I. i) and reason must be subordinated to it. All sound  reasoning, we are told, depends upon the principles of common sense:
In a word, the dictates of common sense are, in  respect to human knowledge in general, what the axioms of geometry  are in respect to mathematics: on the supposition that those axioms  are false or dubious, all mathematical reasoning falls to the ground;  and on the supposition that the dictates of common sense are  erroneous and deceitful, all science, truth, and virtue, are vain.  (I. ii. 9)
What  are these axioms of common sense, these foundational principles on  which all sound reasoning rests? It is not necessary to discuss all  the principles listed in Beattie’s catalogue of common sense.  For the purpose of illustration, a representative sample of four  “principles of common sense” should suffice: (i) the  evidence of perception (or “external sense”) is not  fallacious, but fundamentally reliable; (ii) whatever begins to  exist, proceeds from some cause; (iii) Nature is uniform; and (iv)  human testimony is basically trustworthy. Armed with this arsenal of  principles, Beattie can now confidently enter the lists against an  assortment of formidable philosophical foes. Beattie wielded  principle (i) against skeptics (be they Cartesian or Humean), as well  as against Berkeleyan idealists; principle (ii) against atheist  critics of cosmological arguments; principle (iii) against Humean  skeptics about induction; and principle (iv) against Humean scoffers  at miracles.
If  Beattie is right about common sense, much (if not all) of modern  philosophy is wrong. The basic mistake of the moderns lies in their  tendency to make reason, not common-sense, the ultimate judge or  arbiter of truth. Reason is a shameless upstart who, ignorant of its  proper station, disgraces itself by refusing to submit to authority  (in the form of common sense). Such insubordination can only lead to  chaos, catastrophe, and confusion:
When Reason invades the rights of Common Sense, and presumes to  arraign that authority by which she herself acts, nonsense and  confusion must of necessity ensue; science will soon come to have  neither head nor tail, beginning nor end; philosophy will grow  contemptible; and its adherents, far from being treated, as in former  times, upon the footing of conjurers, will be thought by the vulgar,  and by every man of sense, to be little better than downright fools.  (I. ii. 9)
Philosophers therefore  despise common sense at their peril. But how are we to distinguish  genuine principles of common sense from the pretenders? Is Beattie  suggesting that any cherished conviction or idée fixe that I am unable to prove automatically qualifies as a dictate of  common sense? He endeavours to supply us with criteria or marks by  which authentic principles of common sense can be identified. (1) We are irresistibly inclined by nature to believe the principles  of common sense. Our powerful attachment to them, being spontaneous  and quasi-instinctive, cannot be destroyed by philosophical argument  – no matter how ingenious. (2) The principles of common sense  are universally accepted. Far from being prejudices peculiar to a  given time, place, culture, sect, or class, they have been believed  by virtually all people in all ages. (3) The principles of  common sense cannot be proven because they are epistemologically  foundational or basic. They cannot be justified by reference to some  more evident proposition(s), because none exist. (4) The  principles of common sense are indispensable presuppositions of our  conduct and practice. We cannot live or act prudently unless we  assume that our senses are reliable, that human testimony can be a  source of knowledge, that past will resemble the future, and so on.  Anyone who actually doubted or denied such principles would  put himself on par with the lunatic or the fool.
Here it  may be asked: In what way does Beattie’s Essay on Truth  improve upon Thomas Reid’s earlier Inquiry into the Human Mind on  the Principles of Common Sense (1764)? The short answer is that  it does not. Beattie freely admits that he is heavily indebted to  Reid. However, the Essay differs from the Inquiry in  one obvious respect: Beattie’s tract is infinitely more  hard-hitting and caustic than anything ever penned by Reid. Where  Reid writes respectfully of his opponents, Beattie tends to denounce  and vilify them. Where Reid wraps up his subtle thoughts in  restrained professorial prose, Beattie’s simple arguments are  presented with the spleen and verve of the born orator. These  contrasts reflect a more basic difference between our two defenders  of common sense. Unlike Reid, Beattie is first and foremost a  moralist and an apologist. He is not interested in defending a subtle  or nuanced philosophical thesis. Rather, Beattie is defending a lofty  (albeit vaguely defined) cause – to wit, “the cause of truth,  virtue, and mankind.” Translated into more prosaic (but  precise) terms, Beattie’s “cause” is that of  deflecting philosophical opposition to a broadly Judeo-Christian  understanding of human nature. According to this understanding, human  beings are free but finite creatures made in the image of a good God  or Creator. Neither brutes nor divinities, we occupy an intermediate  place in creation and are better suited for action than for  speculation. Inasmuch as our cognitive faculties are God-given, we  may trust their deliverances – provided we acknowledge their  limitations and exercise them under conditions that define our humble  “middle state” (to quote Alexander Pope). Beattie’s  bold strategy in the Essay was to argue that these familiar  ideas about human nature are unassailable because they rest on the  solid and irrefragable foundation of “common sense”  (rather than philosophic demonstrability).  Here was a book apt to  reassure the devout but timorous Christian reader, for it confidently  announced that Humean scepticism – and the bulk of modern  philosophy – was infinitely more suited to be ridiculed than to be  feared.
 3. Beattie Contra Hume on Racism
Although the Essay on Truth is largely devoted to re-instating the rights of common sense in the  spheres of epistemology and metaphysics, it includes a forceful  critique of Hume’s racism.
Hume’s racism?  To some, this phrase may have a strange and novel sound. After all, Hume is usually portrayed as a patron saint of the Enlightenment: a  genial cosmopolitan, sweetly reasonable, unfailingly courteous and  amiable, “as approaching as nearly to the idea of a perfectly  wise and virtuous man, as perhaps the nature of human frailty will  permit” (in the oft-cited words of his friend, Adam Smith). Yet  in Hume’s essay “Of National Characters,” we catch a  glimpse of a different side of le bon David. For there, in an  infamous footnote, Hume writes:
I am apt to suspect the  negroes to be naturally inferior to the whites. There scarcely ever  was a civilized nation of that complexion, nor any individual,  eminent either in action or speculation. No ingenious manufactures  amongst them, no arts, no sciences … [T]here are Negroe slaves  dispersed all over Europe, of whom none ever discovered any symptoms  of ingenuity.
In the Essay on Truth,  Beattie condemns these sentiments: “These assertions are  strong; but I know not whether they have anything else to recommend  them.” (III. ii). Beattie does not stop there. Beattie does not  merely fulminate against Hume’s racism with a self-serving show of  conspicuous indignation; instead he rolls up his sleeves and adroitly  dissects Hume’s pro-racist arguments. (1) Beattie disputes  Hume’s basic assertions about the achievements (or alleged lack  thereof) of non-European societies: “[W]e know that these  assertions are not true … The Africans and Americans are known to  have many ingenious manufactures and arts among them, which even  Europeans would find it no easy matter to imitate.” (III. ii).  (2) Moreover, Beattie says, Hume’s reasoning is invalid.  For even if Hume’s claims were correct, his conclusion would not  follow. “[O]ne may as well say of an infant, that he can never  become a man, as of a nation now barbarous, that it never can be  civilized.” (III. Ii). Should anyone doubt this, he need only  recall that “[t]hat the inhabitants of Great Britain and France  were as savage two thousand years ago, as those of Africa and America  are at this day.” (III. ii). (3) Beattie is unimpressed  by Hume’s argument that “there are Negroe slaves dispersed all  over Europe, of whom none ever discovered any symptoms of ingenuity.”  Beattie insists that this claim is unwarranted as well as false. But  even if it were true, it would not justify belief in Hume’s  natural inferiority thesis, for “the condition of a slave is  not favourable to genius of any kind.” (III. ii). (4) While Beattie does not downgrade European achievements in the arts  and sciences, he denies that they can be used to prove that European  nations or “races” are superior. He stresses the extent  that the achievements on which European nations pride themselves were  either discovered by accident or the inventions of a gifted few, to  whom alone all credit must go.
Beattie caps his rebuttal with  two observations. First, his critique of Hume’s natural  inferiority thesis indirectly supports the cause of religion because  such racism cannot be reconciled neatly with a true Judeo-Christian  understanding of human nature. Second, Beattie stresses that his  disagreement with Hume on the subject of racism is not merely  theoretical or speculative. On the contrary, the dispute is intensely  practical, for the natural inferiority thesis can (and frequently  was) invoked to justify slavery – an institution that Beattie, a  committed abolitionist, decried as “a barbarous piece of  policy.”
 4. Elements of Moral Science (1790-1793)
There is  considerable overlap between the Essay on Truth and Beattie’s  later Elements of Moral Science (1790-1793). The creed of  common sense is again soberly recited. We are told that  consciousness, memory, and testimony must be taken as trustworthy,  that we can assume that Nature is uniform, that we are free moral  agents, and that whatever begins to exist must proceed from some  cause.
Despite  these and other doctrinal similarities, the Elements differs  from the Essay in at least four respects. First, stylistically  the Essay was full of sarcasm, scorn and splendid invective,  while the Elements is comparatively tame, subdued, and dry.  Second, the Elements is more philosophically constructive than  the Essay, as Beattie now appears more interested in building  and inhabiting his own modest system than in laying siege to the  systems of foes and rivals. Third, the Elements offers a more  in-depth exploration of several topics only lightly touched upon in  the Essay (for example,  perception, natural theology, and  immortality). Finally, the Elements offers sustained coverage  of several areas, such as political philosophy and economics, that  are not meaningfully discussed in the Essay.
 5. Beattie and Scottish Common Sense Philosophy
Historians  of Scottish philosophy frequently describe Beattie’s Essay as a simplified version of the philosophy of common sense  expounded by Reid in his Inquiry of 1764. While there is much  truth in this judgment, it need not be construed as a reproach.  Popularization can be done well or badly. Beattie did it well.
Nevertheless,  it is undeniable that Reid’s views on matters philosophical  evolved in a way that Beattie’s never did. After retiring from  teaching in 1781, Reid published two major works, Essays on the  Intellectual Powers of Man (1785) and Essays on the Active  Powers of Man (1788). More sophisticated and constructive than  anything Beattie ever produced, these two books, along with Reid’s  earlier Inquiry, became the founding documents of the Scottish  common sense school of philosophy. The Reidian gospel was soon  propagated with aplomb by Edinburgh Chair-holder Dugald Stewart  (1753-1828), who had listened to Reid’s lectures in Glasgow. An  elegant stylist, Stewart championed common sense both in his  well-attended lectures and in his edifying books, the first pair of  which – Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind (1792)  and Outlines of Moral Philosophy (1793) – appeared around the  same time as Beattie’s Elements of Moral Science. Stewart’s  interest in Reid was shared by another renowned Edinburgh professor,  the erudite but preternaturally verbose Sir William Hamilton  (1788-1856). No slavish disciple, Hamilton sought to “improve”  on Reid’s philosophy in various ways, often by drawing on Kantian  doctrines. A singular philosophical beast, the resulting hybrid was  slain, stuffed, and mounted by John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) in An  Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy (1865).   Nevertheless, Hamilton’s extensively (or, as some might say,  obsessively) annotated edition of Reid’s Collected Works did  much to make them more widely available.
With Reid  cast thus as the heroic founder of the emerging Scotch school,  Beattie was relegated to the supporting role of ardent and skilful  propagandist. This, at any rate, was how Dugald Stewart portrays  Beattie in a letter to Sir William Forbes, Beattie’s friend and  biographer. Stewart declares that the Essay on Truth is  effective as “a popular antidote against the illusions of  metaphysical scepticism,” but, he is quick to add, Beattie’s  polemic lacks the subtlety, patience, and precision we find in Reid.  Nevertheless, Stewart avers that Beattie’s achievement is not  negligible:
These critical remarks on the “Essay on Truth” (I must  request you to observe) do not in the least affect the essential  merits of that very valuable performance; and I have stated them with  the greater freedom, because your late excellent friend possessed so  many other unquestionable claims to high distinction – as a  moralist, as a critic, as a grammarian, as a pure and classical  writer, and, above all, as the author of the “Minstrel.”  In any one of the different paths to which his ambition has led him,  it would not perhaps be difficult to name some of his  contemporaries by whom he has been surpassed; but where is the  individual to be found, who has aspired with greater success to an  equal variety of literary honours?
Stewart’s  verdict still seems a just one. Beattie was a talented, ambitious,   and multi-faceted man of letters, but his gifts and merits as a  philosopher were not the greatest. If philosophy is indeed “a  series of footnotes to Plato” (Whitehead), then Beattie can be  read as a dramatic footnote to Reid and – ironically – to the  abhorred Hume.
 6. References and Further Reading

Cloyd,  E. L. (1972) James Burnett, Lord Monboddo. Oxford: Clarendon  Press.

Touches on Monboddo’s relationship with Beattie; indicates why  their friendship did not last.


Fieser,  J. (1994) “Beattie’s Lost Letter to the London Review,”  Hume Studies 20: 1-12.

Reconstructs a controversy between  Beattie and a pro-Humean literary faction.


Fieser,  J. (2000) “Introduction” to James Beattie’s Essay on  the Nature and Immutability of Truth in Opposition to Sophistry and  Scepticism. Volume 2 of the 5 volume set, Scottish Common  Sense Philosophy: Sources and Origins. (ed. J. Fieser) Bristol,  UK: Thoemmes Press.

Thorough presentation of Beattie’s defence of  common sense in the Essay on Truth.


Fieser,  J. (ed.) (2000) Early Responses to Reid, Oswald, Beattie, and  Stewart: I. Volume 3 of the 5 volume set, Scottish Common  Sense Philosophy: Sources and Origins. Bristol, UK: Thoemmes  Press.

Contains early reviews of the Essay (including Edmund Burke’s  positive notice of the second edition of 1771).


Grave,  S.A. (1960) The Scottish Philosophy of Common Sense. Oxford:  Clarendon Press.

Beattie’s epistemological and metaphysical views are  portrayed as vulgarized versions of Reid’s.


Harris,  J. A. (2002) “James Beattie, The Doctrine of Liberty, and the  Science of the Mind,” Reid Studies (5): 16-29.

Acknowledges Beattie’s shortcomings as a philosopher, but credits him  with a commitment to understanding the human mind scientifically.  Sheds light on the Essay’s critique of necessitarianism.


King,  E.H. (1971) “A Scottish “Philosophical” Club in the  Eighteenth Century,” Dalhousie Review (50): 201-214.

Describes the inner workings of the Aberdeen Philosophical Society,  and discusses Beattie’s participation.


King,  E.H. (1972) “James Beattie’s Essay on Truth (1770): An  Enlightenment “Bestseller”,” Dalhousie Review (51): 390-403.

An account of the Essay‘s popularity.


Kuehn,  M. (1987) Scottish Common Sense in Germany, 1768-1800: A  Contribution to the History of the Critical Philosophy. Kingston  and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.

Discusses the  influence of Reid and, to a lesser extent, Beattie and Oswald upon  Kant and his German contemporaries. A clear-headed, fair assessment  of Beattie’s strengths and weaknesses.


McCosh,  J. (1875) The Scottish Philosophy. London: Macmillan.

Chapter  XXIX contains a biographical sketch and an outline of the Essay.  Depicts Beattie as an eloquent popularizer of the philosophy of  common sense.


Mossner,  E.C. (1980) The Life of David Hume. 2nd edition. Oxford:  Clarendon Press.

Briefly describes the reaction of Hume and his  Edinburgh circle to the Essay‘s success.


Popkin,  R.H. (1980) The High Road to Pyrrhonism. San Diego: Austin  Hill Press.

Contains an article entitled “Hume’s Racism”  (pp. 251-266), in which Popkin helpfully puts Beattie’s  critique of Hume’s racism in historical context.


Priestley,  J. (1774) An Examination of Dr. Reid’s Inquiry into the Human Mind  on the Principles of Common Sense, Dr. Beattie’s Essay on the Nature  and Immutability of Truth, and Dr. Oswald’s Appeal to Common Sense in  Behalf of Religion. London: J. Johnson.

Includes an extended  critique of Beattie, composed shortly after the Essay’s publication.  Priestley complains that the Essay‘s author is (among  other things) an incorrigible dogmatist who relies too heavily on ad  hominem arguments. The Appendix includes some correspondence between  Beattie and Priestley.



Author Information
Douglas McDermid
Email: dmcdermi@trentu.ca
Trent University
Canada





An encyclopedia of philosophy articles written by professional philosophers.

About
Editors
Desired Articles
Submissions
Volunteer
 

Stay Connected 
  
  
  

Browse by TopicBrowse by Topic
Select Category
History of Philosophy
   17th Century European
   18th Century European
   19th Century European
   Ancient Philosophy
   History Misc.
   History of Analytic
   Medieval Philosophy
   Philosophers
   Renaissance Philosophy
Metaphysics & Epistemology
   Epistemology
   Metaphysics
   Mind & Cognitive Science
   Philosophy of Language
   Philosophy of Religion
   Uncategorized
Philosophical Traditions
   American Philosophy
   Chinese Philosophy
   Continental Philosophy
   Feminist Philosophy
   Indian Philosophy
   Islamic Philosophy
   Tradition Misc.
Science, Logic, & Mathematics
   Logic
   Philosophy of Mathematics
   Philosophy of Science
Value Theory
   Aesthetics
   Bioethics
   Ethics
   Philosophy of Law
   Political Philosophy
   Value Misc.


 




© Copyright Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its Authors  | ISSN 2161-0002
			







